Page 1 of 20
CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Special Meeting
Monday, March 6, 2023
CALL TO ORDER
Present:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott- Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely: 
None
Absent:   
None
SPECIAL ORDERS OF THE DAY
1. 
Adopt Resolution Honoring Roland Rivera for 21 years of service to the
City of Palo Alto
ACTION: Council Adopted Resolution Honoring Roland Rivera.  
Director of Planning and Development Services Jonathan Lait reviewed
Roland Rivera' s career in the Planning and Development
Services
Department before his retirement last week. He stated Mr. Rivera was a
valued public employee whose impact was felt by many and who would be
missed.  
Council Member Lauing read the resolution: " This is an expression of
appreciation to Roland Rivera upon your retirement. Whereas Roland Rivera
began his career with the City of Palo Alto on July 2, 2001, and has provided
exemplary service throughout his 21- year tenure; and whereas Roland
Rivera has enthusiastically
served the citizens of Palo Alto for over two
decades, supporting Planning and Development Services and leading the
department- wide transition of data and technology efforts; and whereas
Roland Rivera began as an Associate Planner supporting long- range planning
for almost 18 years and contributed to the development and adoption of
three city Housing Elements and one Comprehensive
Plan; and whereas
Roland Rivera developed the City of Palo Alto GIS parcel report and was
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
awarded the 2007 Innovative Use of Technology Award; and whereas Roland
Rivera implemented Buildingeye and the 311 CRM system to further
customer service; and whereas Roland Rivera built the data group within
Planning and Development
Services and has mentored and trained a reliable
team; and whereas Roland Rivera was instrumental in providing continuity of
services to the Planning and Development community through the
implantation of the online permit system at the start of the pandemic; and
whereas Roland Rivera is recognized by his peers and City Staff for being a
dedicated, knowledgeable, conscientious, dependable, and supportive team
member, now therefore let it be resolved that the City of Palo Alto hereby
gratefully records and extends its sincere appreciation to Roland Rivera for
his dedication and excellent services rendered to the City this date of March
6,2023," signed by Mayor Kou.  
Roland Rivera thanked his wife and family for their support over his years of
work with the City and was also thankful for the opportunity to contribute
and be a part of the City of Palo Alto and the community.  
2. 
Select Applicants for Interviews for Board and Commission Openings
on the Historic Resources Board, Human Relations Commission, Parks
and Recreation Commission, Planning and Transportation
Commission, 
Utilities Advisory Commission
City Clerk Lesley Milton explained that the City Council changed the process
for appointing boards and commissions, with a 2-term limit and a
consolidated recruitment period with old terms ending March 31 and new
terms beginning April 1 rather than occurring multiple times throughout the
year. She discussed the process of appointment and listed the open
positions, with a total of 56 applications. She gave options on how to
proceed with the selection of applicants to interview for the positions.  
Mayor Kou asked for clarification on a Council CAO committee versus an ad
hoc committee.  
City Attorney Molly Stump responded that a Council CAO committee is a
Brown Act body that would need to do its work at a noticed and open public
meeting with no basis to go into closed session. An ad hoc committee
created with the limited purpose of addressing this large volume of
applicants this year could be directed to meet publicly or informally, with
more flexibility.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
Council Member Lythcott- Haims understood the Human Relations
Commission was interested in increasing their number from five to seven
and questioned if Council would consider that.  
City Attorney Stump responded that Council could take this topic up but it
would need to come back in the future as it was not on the current agenda. 
It would also require an ordinance because the HRC is described in municipal
code as a body with five members.  
City Manager Ed Shikada stated that could be done through a referral
tonight as not much analysis was needed.  
Council Member Burt expressed some concerns about the policy changes, 
including the issue of cutting back on the size of some of the commissions
and the HRC requiring all members to be residents. He was also concerned
about whether the limit of two consecutive terms should be applied to all
commissions as the loss of so much institutional knowledge at once creates
a commission that will have a harder time getting up to speed and making
valuable recommendations. He felt that all commission appointments
occurring at once created difficulty in scheduling interviews for so many
applicants at a busy time of year. He preferred that if it was referred to
another body, those meetings be done publicly and transparently regardless
of whether it was legally obligated.  
Vice Mayor Stone was agreeable to include expanding the HRC in the
motion. He felt the process needed to be refined and this was a good
learning opportunity to see what works. He was interested in articulating
standards for who may get an interview.  
City Manager Shikada stated that the Rule of Five is often used for personnel
interviews, interviewing no more than the number of vacancies plus five.  
City Clerk Milton stated previous applicants were approached to see if they
were interested in the process again. There was no one who wanted to
interview again, with some stating they did not want to repeat the process
after interviewing and being rejected.  
Vice Mayor Stone wanted to respect those who take the time to apply but
not put every applicant through the interview process if the number could be
whittled down. He liked the suggestion of an ad hoc committee and was
interested in discussing the specifics.  
City Attorney Stump clarified what is on the agenda and which topics could
be discussed under this item.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
Council Member Lauing felt the fundamental problem of trying to screen and
fairly narrow down applicants was that a number of the jobs had no
qualifications other than residency. He felt it was implied that all applicants
would get interviews and did not want to change that. He suggested
prioritizing the gap areas; for example, UAC was down by three members. 
He wanted to include HRC as part of the current business in order to
determine how many were interviewed and selected.  
Council Member Veenker asked how many people typically withdraw
applications.  
City Clerk Milton responded that it was typically a small number, one or two.  
Mayor Kou appreciated anyone who submitted an application and generally
felt it was worthy to hear from each of them. At the same time, with the
large number, she supported the suggestion of seeing which ones were of
more urgency. She was in favor of the CAO committee.  
Council Member Burt asked if the issue of increasing the size of the HRC
could be added to a future agenda on consent. He questioned whether a
current board or commission member could serve after their term has
expired if a new member has not been appointed.  
City Attorney Stump stated the issue of the HRC could move forward if the
majority of Council supported it.  
City Clerk Milton stated it was possible for members to continue to serve if a
new member was not yet appointed but added that several commission
members did not wish to extend their terms.  
Council Member Burt started it would be important for prioritizing to know
which board or commission had members willing to extend their terms
another month or so. He preferred either the full Council doing interviews or
referral to a CAO committee to screen for those who would get in-person
interviews but did not support the CAO committee interviewing on behalf of
the Council. He felt the Council could give guidance on the extent the CAO
should narrow applicants or could give discretion to the CAO to recommend
interview of the candidates they believed met the qualifications. Regarding
previous applicants feeling discouraged, he stated all applications were
valued and it was often a choice between very qualified candidates. He
recalled a number of occasions when someone was appointed on a second or
third application.  
Council Member Tanaka was not in favor of having a separate committee
interview only or selecting who interviews. He preferred each council
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
member getting a certain number of votes to say who they want to interview
or to interview everyone. He supported the HRC increase.  
Council Member Lythcott- Haims asked for clarification on Council Member
Tanaka' s suggestion on the interview process. She was also not in favor of
the CAO doing a screening or a full vote and wanted to see the whole
Council participate.  
Council Member Tanaka explained that each slot had a certain number of
open positions and suggested each member select someone they think is
appropriate and turn it in to the clerk. Anyone applicant receiving at least
one vote would be interviewed.  
MOTION: Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member
Lythcott- Haims, to use the established list of candidates and allow council
members to submit to the City Clerk by Wednesday the candidates they wish
to interview, and have it placed on the next agenda as an action item for
discussion, according to the following votes per council member per opening, 
and agendize at the next opportunity an ordinance to increase the size of the
HRC from 5 to 7 members: 
HRB – 3 openings, all applicants to be interviewed
HRC – 2 openings, all applicants to be interviewed
PRC – 4 openings, 6 votes each
PTC – 3 openings, 5 votes each
UAC – 4 openings, 6 votes each
Council Member Burt was receptive to the process but not to doing it at this
meeting. He suggested adopting the process and continuing this item to the
next meeting. 
There was further discussion about the process, including the amount of
votes for each board or commission, submission of votes to the City Clerk, 
how many votes would be required to ensure an interview, and whether this
item would come back on consent or as an action item. 
APPROVED: 7-0
CLOSED SESSION
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
3. 
CONFERENCE
WITH LABOR NEGOTIATORS
City Designated
Representatives: City Manager and his Designees Pursuant to Merit
System Rules and Regulations ( Ed Shikada, Kiely Nose, Sandra Blanch, 
Tori Anthony, Molly Stump, and Jennifer Fine) Employee Organization: 
Service Employees International Union ( SEIU) Local 521, Utilities
Management and Professional Association of Palo Alto ( UMPAPA), Palo
Alto Peace Officers’ Association ( PAPOA), Palo Alto Police Management
Association ( PMA), International Association of Fire Fighters ( IAFF) 
Local 1319, Palo Alto Fire Chiefs’ Association ( FCA); Authority: 
Government Code Section 54957. 6 ( a) 
MOTION: Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Council Member
Lauing, to go into Closed Session.  
APPROVED: 7-0
The Council adjourned to Closed Session at 6: 04 P.M.  
The Council reconvened the meeting at 7: 52 P.M.  
STUDY SESSION
4. 
Comprehensive Status Update and Long- Range Planning Discussion on
the Palo Alto Airport
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston stated that in the eight years since the
City took back the airport from Santa Clara County, there had been
significant progress in improving customer service and airport infrastructure. 
This item was to review the overall status as well as describe the long- range
facilities and sustainability plan process required by FAA regulations.  
Airport Manager Andrew Swanson gave an overview and history of the
airport. Since the transfer from the County in 2014, the airport completed
major projects to assure safety and bring up its standards. He reviewed the
general role of PAO as a reliever airport supporting general aviation traffic. 
Palo Alto' s Comprehensive
Plan for the airport involves ensuring
economically viability with minimal environmental
impacts. He described the
PAO community, including 360 aircraft and 5 flight schools. He explained the
stakeholder engagement and community outreach and reviewed plans for
the future, in the short- term fuel updates and funding opportunities. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
Kelly Moulton, Director of Aviation C&S Companies, discussed the Long-
Range Facilities and Sustainability Plan to determine the needs of the airport
for the next 20 years, balancing FAA rules, safety regulations, Comp Plan, 
community input, and stakeholder output. She described expected
improvements. There were four phases: overall airport understanding, vision
and goals for the airport, requirements and alternatives, and recommended
alternatives. Engagement and public input will be done throughout the whole
process.  
Public Works Director Eggleston noted this will return to Council during
phase 3 to check in during the development of alternatives, most likely in
the fall of this year.  
PUBLIC COMMENTS
1. Natasha felt the Palo Alto Airport was an important
resource. She
described her career history leading up to obtaining a Commercial
Multi- Engine Certificate at PAO and an Airline Transport Certificate
at Reid- Hillview. She believed learning to fly at the local Bay Area
airports was the best training, preparing one to fly in any airspace, 
and wanted to keep PAO open and thriving.  
2. Jennifer Chang Hetterly spoke on behalf of the Sierra Club' s Bay
Alive
Campaign, 
which
advocates
locally
and
regionally
for
preservation
and
enhancement
of
Bay
ecosystems
and
for
community
resilience to sea level rise. The Campaign would like to
see resiliency for the natural environment reflected in the airport' s
high- level goals and see more detail about the various initiatives. 
They wanted to be included in stakeholder outreach.  
3. Jennifer
Landesmann
noted
East
Palo
Alto
and
noise
were
not
mentioned in the long- range initiatives. She stated the FAA circulars
guiding the planning process were half a century old and asked if
planning will be done with those methods or the 2023 big data to
understand airport impacts and operations. She quoted a comment
from 2016 from a middle
school student
complaining
about
SFO
noise and stated the nighttime noise had still not been addressed. 
She felt Palo Alto had a responsibility to do better than SFO.  
4. Aram James stated this would have been a perfect time to have a
joint study session with East Palo Alto, as they are the victims of
much of the toxicity, noise pollution, and accidents. He believed the
airport should be relocated onto Stanford property with PAO turned
into a park.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
5. Karen
Porter
stated
a
downside
of
the
airport
was
the
lead
emissions
generated
by
single- engine
piston
aircraft. She
was
encouraged by the City's actions to make unleaded fuel available. 
She described
the negative effects of lead and related data about
lead air pollution, with Palo Alto being # 19 in the top lead polluting
airports in the country.  
6. Carol Munch spoke representing
Palo Alto Disaster Airlift Response
Team ( DART), which was established
in 2020 as another means of
helping in times of disaster, such as earthquakes, fire, and floods. 
DART has participated in four exercises, three of them bringing face
shields
and
PPE and one moving
search
and rescue
dogs. She
stated this was something
communities
can do for each other in
times of disaster, and she wanted to continue
to see the airport
operating.  
7. Tom Myers stated he learned to fly 35 years ago in Palo Alto and
now runs the world' s largest
flying
club with 60 airplanes, 40
instructors, and 10 employees, putting over $ 6M a year into the
Palo Alto economy. He watched
the airport deteriorate
under the
control of the County and was very grateful for the support under
the City.  
8. Bob
Lenox
previously
served
for two
decades
on the
County' s
Airport Commission. He stated DART, Angel Flights, and Stanford
Life Flight were all dependent on PAO and that thousands of pilots
used the airport. He felt it was an incredible
and irreplaceable
regional asset.  
Council Member Burt described Palo Alto has had success with the financial
plan since taking ownership of the airport. Part of the plan was reflected in a
series of recommendations, largely folded into the Comprehensive Plan, 
around reconciling the contributions the airport makes to the community, 
emergency services, economic value, and value to many residents with the
competing environment interests. He felt it was important to look beyond
the ways the airport could be internally sustainable to how it contributes to
the sustainability of the City as a whole, for example, solar arrays with the
potential to have a significant micro- grid increasing the resilience and
reliability of the system. Regarding leaded gas, he wanted clarification on
what percentage of flights would be trainers and what the next steps would
be. Regarding land use, there had been discussion on how having space
adjacent to the wastewater treatment plant for environmental
treatment
processes. He estimated the area designed for a second runway exceeds 10
acres and asked if there was a reason that area needs to be part of the
airport.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
Airport Manager Andrew Swanson responded that the study would look at
that. He stated more area is needed for safety now than before.  
Vice Mayor Stone asked if there were plans to ban leaded fuel in the near
future.  
Public Works Director Eggleston replied there was no plan to ban leaded fuel
because of FAA requirements. Reid- Hillview is in litigation with the FAA
because of that.   
Vice Mayor Stone was concerned about unintended consequences
of the
sustainability goals, like waypoints and charging stations for future electric
airplanes. He questioned if the airport could sustain future volume if it is one
of few waypoint airports on a busy flight path.  
Airport Manager Swanson responded that all of that would be looked at in
the study.  
Vice Mayor Stone asked how staffing issues have been impacting service
levels.  
Airport Manager Swanson stated that has been a challenge and the airport
continues to look at ways to develop more revenue to bring staff in.  
Public Works Director Eggleston added that annual revenues are about
2.7M with about $ 2.1M in regular ongoing operating expenses. The
difference is the funding available for adding more staff or matching FAA
grants. With such a small amount, it can be a stretch to come up with
matches for projects. It has been a balance of stabilizing the airport
financially, paying back the initial loan from the general fund, and slowly
adding staff.  
Mayor Kou asked how much authority was given to FAA as the airport
sponsor and if there was a time limit on that.  
Public Works Director Eggleston stated that the FAA' s grant assurance
requires a commitment to operate the airport following their guidelines, and
it is 20 years from the last grant.  
Mayor Kou stated the Santa Clara County CLUP ( Comprehensive
Land Use
Plan) identified the flight paths for takeoffs and approaches, and she
questioned if it was possible to ask them to identify flight paths for takeoffs
and approaches over water, adjusting direction at a higher altitude.  
Airport Manager Swanson stated that can be looked at but there is a
voluntary noise abatement procedure and guidelines that will be reviewed
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
during the planning process, looking for opportunities to improve it. He felt
the departures and arrivals would most benefit from improving the voluntary
noise abatement procedures.  
Mayor Kou believed the main conflict between the airport users and
residents in the neighboring communities
was the noise. She stated there
are no noise monitors and felt that data was needed. She also wanted to
discuss measurement for lead levels to provide a threshold as all these
measurements
would be needed to continue monitoring safety. She was
concerned about capacity issues and was interested in lowering the CNEL
from 60 dB if possible.  
Council Member Lythcott- Haims felt PAO was exceptional, offering
emergency response and the opportunity for noncommercial
pilots and
residents interested in recreational flying but also in that a city that is a
world leader in climate still allows lead gasoline use at the airport and has
the noise of planes after declining to give residents with mobility issues the
right to use E-bikes partly because of noise. These are all choices about
what type of recreation matters and which natural environment matters
enough to protect. She was excited by the planned changes. She questioned
when the airport will have paid back the loan to the City's General Fund and
whether the airport will be self- sustaining at that point or require additional
subsidies.  
Public Works Director Eggleston believed it was 4 to 5 years into a 15- year
repayment schedule.  
Council Member Lythcott- Haims wondered how to enhance the community
benefit of this airport and how the children of Palo Alto and neighboring
cities are involved in the life of the airport.  
Mr. Myers responded that West Valley Flying Club has made a $40,000 flying
scholarship available for a student from East Palo Alto to be taught how to
fly.  
Airport Manager Swanson added there are other programs and different
groups bridging the gap and would report back with more information.  
Council Member Lauing stated the City is the landlord of the airport, a high-
demand resource, and questioned the rents and whether there was a
possibility of more hangars to house more planes. He wanted a more official
regulation of noise than just making pilots aware. He questioned the cost
differential between leaded and unleaded fuels. He asked about the regional
impacts of closing of Reid- Hillview and whether there would be a partnership
between airports to take the extra planes.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
Airport Manager Swanson stated there have been two appraisal processes
and will soon be another to ensure the correct rates and fees for the airport. 
The upcoming study will look at the current hangars to make sure they can
support the solar arrays and also look at solar arrays over the aircraft to
potentially allow a shade port storage hangar. He stated the noise program
was voluntary and could not be regulated due to federal requirements but
was taken seriously by the pilots. The 94 unleaded fuel was a dollar more
than leaded, and going to 100 unleaded fuel would allow all airplanes to use
unleaded. He stated PAO was already almost full and would not be able to
take many additional planes.  
Council Member Veenker was proud of the airport and the emergency
services it provides to the area and was encouraged by the advances in
sustainability. She also shared the frustration over the use of leaded fuel and
asked if there were incentives that could be offered to encourage the
adoption of unleaded fuel.  
Public Works Director Eggleston replied that the focus right now was working
with the airport users groups to make sure they were on board and
committed to making the switch. He felt good about the acceptance of that
fuel and the intent to use it once it is brought on.  
Council Member Tanaka asked how PAO' s fees compare to other similar
airports. He felt there should be some type of direct benefit to Palo Alto
residents, such as lower fees or hangar preference. He asked if there was
something about the fund that restricted moving money from this to other
funds or vice versa. He wanted to see a more detailed income statement for
the airport. Regarding electric vehicles, he wondered if anything could be
done to encourage this technology to be developed in Palo Alto.  
Airport Manager Swanson stated PAO was usually at the higher end of rents
and fees, comparable to San Carlos, and was a desired place to rent. He did
not believe the grant assurance allowed charging different rates for
residents. The grant assurances require operating the fund as an enterprise
fund that must remain at the airport.  
Public Works Director Eggleston stated the most income detail available
would be the annual budget and would bring that next time.  
Council Member Burt was interested in prohibiting leaded gas sales for all
craft approved to use unleaded gas, as soon as possible. He asked about the
timeline for having the unleaded tank up and running. He added that Reid-
Hillview not selling leaded fuel does not mean the planes arriving and
departing there are not using leaded fuel; they are simply shifting the point
of sale. He stated he received a complaint last year regarding the noise of
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
middle- of-the- night departures and felt that not addressing that type of
issue would lead to pushback for the closure of the airport. He wanted to
hear more about the ability to control that.  
Airport Manager Swanson stated that as long as the equipment arrives in
late May, the first load of fuel will be taken in June. The airport used a flight
tracking system that is available to anyone and was looking at programs to
improve tracking. He stated there were not a lot of nighttime flights but
there was a mix of essential services, like medevac flights or law
enforcement surveillance, and recreational flights.  
Council Member Burt asked if it was possible to control nighttime
recreational flights.  
Airport Manager Swanson replied that it would be very difficult to do that
with the grant assurances.  
Council Member Burt stated the prospective revenue from solar awnings
could be added to the enterprise fund, which could then be used to fund
things for the airport like training programs for youth, environmental
initiatives, and even a restaurant on airport property to service both the
airport and golf course. He felt that for PAO to be a model in sustainability
for aviation and aviation- related activities, something important was the
transformation not only from lead- free gas but to zero- emission vehicles, 
which also address the noise issue. He would like to see this airport become
a center of zero- emission vehicle development and aviation.  
Mayor Kou asked if it was possible to impose higher fees for night flights and
also suggested the Airport Association could help in getting all the pilots to
understand the noise problem. She asked how long before the second fuel
tank would be switched to unleaded. She wanted to ensure engagement with
East Palo Alto and Menlo Park regarding the noise issue and asked whether
Mountain View was affected by the airport. She mentioned a nonprofit
contacting her about getting a hangar to let kids learn how to disassemble
and reassemble a broken airplane and asked if that was something any
flying schools had considered.  
Public Works Director Eggleston responded that increased fees for night
flights would be investigated. The goal was to move from a complaint
system to being proactive.  
Airport Manger Swanson added that once the unleaded fuel began to move, 
the other tank could be transferred. The 100 possibly being available sooner
would transform that much sooner. He stated there were not many noise
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
reports from Mountain View. There had been talk about partnerships to bring
youth to the airport, but there was not enough hangar space currently.  
AGENDA CHANGES, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS
None
PUBLIC COMMENT
1. Katie
Reuff
and
Julia
Zeitlin, cofounders
of the
Palo
Alto
Student
Climate Coalition ( PASCC), extended an invitation to the 2023 March
and
Rally
for
Climate
Justice
on April
21 from
4: 00 to 6: 30, a
community
event
with
local
activists, 
leaders, 
and
community
organizations
from across the Bay Area. They asked if the City of Palo
Alto was interested in becoming an official sponsor and also requested
Mayor Kou speak at the event.  
2. Aram James reported that he felt he was the victim of a hate crime in
which bumper stickers opposing aid for Israel were removed from his
car. He asked that the individuals involved would start a conversation
with him instead of vandalizing
his bumper sticker. He had reported
the incident to the police and commended the professionalism of Agent
Erin Goodell in taking the complaint.  
3. Phoebe Mota- Judges, representing
PASCC, spoke about the increase in
gas utility bills. With climate
change
worsening, there will be more
unpredictable
and devastating storms, making natural gas even more
unreliable. PASCC urged the Council to set a sunset date for natural
gas to transition the City to a reliable energy source. A shutoff date
would speed up the process of electrification.  
4. Jeff Greenfield stated next week' s agenda includes permanent parklet
fees and license fees for restaurant use of parklets, and he hoped the
Council
would
consider
license
fees
for
similar
usage
of
planned
community public- benefit outdoor spaces as well. He gave examples of
those
spaces
taken
over by restaurants
for outdoor
dining, closing
them off from public use, which was directly analogous to the current
temporary use of parklets for outdoor dining. He felt it was reasonable
for restaurants
to be charged for use of what was intended to be a
shared space.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
CONSENT CALENDAR
Council Member Tanaka registered a No vote on Items 5 and 7.  
MOTION: Mayor Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Stone, to
approve the Consent Calendar Items 5-9.  
5. 
Approval of Contract Number C23186274 with Monterey Mechanical
Co. in an Amount Not- to-Exceed $ 1,500,000 to Provide On- Call
Emergency and Critical Construction Services at the Regional Water
Quality Control Plant – Wastewater Treatment Fund Capital
Improvement Program Project WQ- 19002; CEQA status: Exempt under
CEQA Guidelines sections 15301( b) 
6. 
Approval of Construction Contract with L.D. Strobel Co., Inc. 
C23186775) in the amount of $414,486 and Authorization for Change
Orders up to a Not- to-Exceed Amount of $41,449 for the Purchase and
Installation of Radio Antennas for the Public Safety Building Capital
Improvement
Program Project ( PE- 15001); CEQA: Environmental
Impact Report for the PSB and the New California Avenue Area Parking
Garage ( Resolution No. 9772). 
7. 
Approval of a Purchase Order with Badger Meter, Inc. in the Amount of
3,000, 000 for FY 2023 to Purchase Additional Badger Water Meters
and Registers for the Advanced Metering Infrastructure Project; CEQA
Status – Exempt ( existing facility) 
8. 
Adopt a Park Improvement
Ordinance to Allow Construction in Greer
Park to Replace a Private Sewer Connection from the 2850 W. 
Bayshore Housing Development; CEQA status – Class 32 infill exempt
Supplemental
Report
9. 
Adoption of an Ordinance amending Chapter 16. 52 ( Flood Hazard
Regulations) to Correct an Error in Ordinance 5566. Environmental
Assessment: Not a Project. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING
PASSED ITEMS 6, 8, and 9: 7-0
PASSED ITEMS 5 and 7: 6-1, Tanaka No
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
Council Member Tanaka stated the actual bid amount for number 5 was only
282,000 but it was approved for $1.5M. It was a single bid, not
competitive, so it would have been better to approve it as it goes as opposed
to authorizing all $1.5M. He was confused about the way the costs were split
in terms of capital charges being fixed or based on usage. On number 7, he
was not opposed to the meters but felt it was difficult to tell if it was a good
price without previous cost information.  
CITY MANAGER COMMENTS
City Manager Ed Shikada described the upcoming State of the City Address
on Wednesday, March 22, at 6 p.m. He shared some opportunities for
community engagement, including an event regarding art at Boulware Park, 
spring activities and programs, a San Francisquito Creek JPA Board Meeting, 
and an Automated License Plate Recognition technology information session. 
He discussed a survey about the experiences of Asian Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders in Palo Alto. He listed notable upcoming City
Council items; items on next week' s agenda were an economic development
study session, prescreening for properties on Middlefield Road, and
discussion and direction of next steps related to parklets.  
Council Member Burt asked if there was an update from Caltrans on the
repeated flooding of the University Avenue underpass. 
City Manager Shikada did not have the information available but would
inquire further with Caltrans.  
The Council took a break from 9:55 to 10: 00 PM.  
ACTION ITEMS
10. 
Adopt Emergency ( 4/ 5 vote required) and Standard Ordinances
Prohibiting Possession of Firearms in Sensitive Places Recognized by
the Supreme Court; Potential Direction to Staff to Develop an
Ordinance Further Expanding the List of Sensitive Places; CEQA Status
Exempt Under CEQA Guidelines Section 15061( b)( 3).  
Deputy City Attorney Madeline Salah gave background on the ordinances
being considered, including the current restrictions on carrying firearms. In
consequence of a recent Supreme Court decision ruling that requiring
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
applicants to demonstrate a special need for a concealed carry permit
violates their Second and Fourteenth Amendment rights, California can no
longer enforce its good cause requirement for those permits. This decision
also set a new standard for laws regulating firearms to focus on the
historical tradition of firearm regulation. Under this regulation, the Court
acknowledged that banning firearms in certain sensitive places can still be
done consistently with the Second Amendment, but there was no consensus
on the term sensitive places, currently interpreted narrowly by the courts. 
She explained the recommended
approach to cover those sensitive places
the Supreme Court has explicitly recognized: schools, government buildings, 
and polling places; Council may also direct Staff to continue to monitor
ongoing litigation and work in conjunction with an ad hoc committee to
develop an expanded list of sensitive places.  
PUBLIC COMMENTS: 
1. Stacey Ashlund of the League of Women Voters of Palo Alto stated
550,000 firearms
were purchased
and/ or owned by Santa Clara
County
residents
as of last year. The League
of Women
Voters
urged the Council to expand the list of sensitive
places to include
houses of worship, sites of public demonstration and rallies, streets
and
sidewalks
within
1000
feet
of
sensitive
places, 
parks, 
playgrounds, stadiums, and libraries. She stated ideally these would
be included
in the emergency
ordinance
effective
immediately
or
added by the ad hoc committee as soon as possible.  
2. Aram James felt it did not make sense to make sensitive areas gun-
free when the people
exercising
their Second
Amendment
rights
legally were not the ones to be concerned
about. He cited 1200
police killings last year and did not want to see all the weapons in
the hands of law enforcement who have exceptions to be armed in
sensitive areas.  
Vice Mayor Stone asked if Staff was aware of any subsequent legal
challenges to other key laws in California like background checks and safety
training requirements. He wanted clarification on the time period referred to
as historical tradition.  
Deputy City Attorney Salah stated there were several high- profile gun-
related cases making their way through the courts but there was no way to
speculate on what would happen. The Court explicitly left the historical
tradition question open, but the two potentially relevant historical periods
were the period of the founding when the Second Amendment was ratified
1791) and when the Second Amendment was incorporated against the
states ( 1868).  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
Vice Mayor Stone stated that caused further concern on other restrictions
related to gun ownership. He cited that regulations like licensing
requirements did not happen in until the Federal Firearms Act of 1938 and
background checks were not required until 1993. He did not have much
hope for potential future cases based on that historic record. He felt the
emergency ordinance needed to be passed and made permanent and that
creating an ad hoc to further explore additional sensitive places was the bare
minimum to accomplish tonight. He asked if the school prohibition also
included after- school hours and wanted explanation of the prohibition of
firearms in government buildings being used for the purpose government
administration, whether that would cover much more outside of City Hall.  
Deputy City Attorney Salah stated the sensitive place distinction was location
based. The courts have specifically said that sensitive place restrictions in
libraries will not stand. Staff will watch how litigation develops regarding the
purpose of government administration requirement.  
City Attorney Molly Stump stated what was put before the Council was what
Staff was confident would be upheld. To take significant additional steps
involved weighing the importance of the policy with fairly substantial legal
risk.  
Council Member Veenker recounted an experience of a threat against Paly
High School when her daughter was a student there, which turned out to be
a hoax. She agreed that it was time to address the public health crisis of gun
violence and hoped that both the emergency and standard ordinances were
adopted unanimously. She believed the ruling was misguided in placing the
burden on the City to find historical evidence of consistent regulations or
responses to societal problems existing more than 150 years ago in order to
expand the spaces covered.  
MOTION: Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Stone, 
to:   
1. Adopt
emergency
Ordinance
5575
prohibiting
the
carrying
of
firearms in sensitive places recognized by the Supreme Court.  
2. Adopt a standard ordinance prohibiting the carrying of firearms in
sensitive
places
recognized
by
the
Supreme
Court, with
the
inclusion of other governmental properties, with their authorization.  
3. Direct Staff to return with a draft resolution stating that the City of
Palo Alto is deeply concerned for the safety of its residents given
the epidemic of gun violence in our county, state, and country; and
but
for
recent
Supreme
Court
and
other
court
decisions
that
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
substantially
reduce the City’s ability to ban firearms more broadly, 
the City of Palo Alto would prohibit firearms in a broader range of
places; and the City calls on state and federal officials to do all they
can to address this issue and broaden the list of sensitive
places
where firearms may be prohibited.  
4. Direct the City’s legislative activity team to support SB 2.  
5. Direct the City Attorney to monitor the evolution of caselaw and
evaluate legal risks and options, and to make recommendations
to
Council
from
time
to time
regarding
additional
sensitive
places
where firearms can be prohibited.  
6. Adopt a determination
that this project
is exempt
under
CEQA
Guidelines section 15061( b)( 3). 
Vice Mayor Stone appreciated Council Member Veenker' s emphasis on the
City's advocacy at the state level and also appreciated her sharing the story
of the threat at Paly, where he was a teacher at that time. He stated what
Palo Alto does tends to reverberate across the country and hoped to be
leaders on some of these issues.  
Council Member Lythcott- Haims was in agreement with adopting the
emergency and standard ordinances. She suggested adding language to
include not only city-owned government buildings but also those operated by
other levels of government.  
City Attorney Stump stated government buildings owned by other
governmental bodies could be included. She presented the language of
Sunnyvale' s ordinance and suggested this be added to the standard
ordinance on the second reading.  
Council Member Burt wanted to be judicious on ad hoc committees and felt
this could be referred to the City' s legal staff.  
There was further discussion on this issue.  
Mayor Kou questioned Mountain View' s ordinance and whether their wording
of "city properties" was specific to where administrative
work was being
done or broad enough to include parks and any land the City owns. She
questioned why Palo Alto did not include distance from sensitive places.  
Deputy City Attorney Salah stated Mountain View had an existing ordinance
banning firearms on city property, not in the context of a sensitive place
ordinance. That ordinance had not been challenged to her knowledge.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
City Attorney Stump stated the ordinances that include distance were pre-
Bruen statues.  
Council Member Tanaka related his experience growing up in an area with
significantly more violence than Palo Alto and felt Palo Alto was a relatively
safe community where he does not have to think about buying a handgun
for safety. He believed law- abiding citizens would obey the laws but that the
ordinance assumes those who commit gun violence would obtain concealed
carry permits. He asked if there was an intention to put in metal detectors.  
City Manager Shikada answered there was no plan to install metal detectors. 
He added that the ordinance would provide an enforcement tool to allow
preventative action to avoid the scenarios described by Council Member
Tanaka.  
Council Member Tanaka liked the spirit of the ordinance but was unsure if it
would actually change anything as those people who commit gun violence
would buy stolen guns or 3D print their own and would not bother with a
concealed weapon permit.  
Council Member Veenker listed a number of incidents of gun violence and
felt that every step taken to limit guns in places where their use could be
most tragic would help. She stated there will always be people who ignore
laws but laws were still important to set the norms of expected behavior.  
City Attorney Stump stated this was intended to reduce the number of
weapons present in a place determined to be sensitive. Presumably, law-
abiding people will comply with the law.  
PASSED: 7-0
COUNCIL MEMBER QUESTIONS, COMMENTS, ANNOUNCEMENTS
Council Member Burt gave several updates: There was discussion at the
recent BCDC board meeting on the impact of sea level rise and how that will
drive elevations in groundwater. At a recent VTA workshop, there were
discussions about the future service level and there seems to be progress on
an expanded bus service the length of the San Antonio corridor. At a recent
Caltrain board meeting, there was extensive discussion about the challenges
with the prime contractor on electrification and the corrective actions in
place. Caltrain is determined to hit the operational system by September
2024. He described an upcoming event on Thursday with the Nordic
Innovation Center and colleagues from Linkoping, Sweden, on climate
initiatives and collaboration.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 20
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/6/2023
Council Member Tanaka felt members, himself included, should try to
respect the clock to ensure a more timely meeting. He felt the Council' s job
was to make the best decision for the people and that even when there was
unanimous opinion, it was important to discuss issues, especially an action
item. He encouraged respect and civility between members. 
ADJOURNMENT
The meeting was adjourned at 11: 07 P. M. 
