Page 1 of 27
CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Special Meeting
Monday, March 13, 2023
Call To Order
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely:  
None
Absent:  
None
Study Session
1. 
Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy Update and Study Session ( Continued
from February 13, 2023) 
ACTION: None Taken
Assistant to the City Manager Steve Guagliardo spoke of the comprehensive
economic
development strategy, which was the cornerstone of a continuing priority of the Council for
economic development and recovery. The overall strategy was a roadmap that would provide
guidance on future investments. He addressed organizing the work on economic development
and investments.  
Streetsense Consultant Larissa Ortiz shared that Palo Alto existed in a very competitive
environment, and they were trying to help Palo Alto be a business-friendly and thriving
environment by acknowledging deficiencies and where competitiveness could be improved. 
They would discuss the impact of the loss of daytime office workers. She noted that the City
could influence but not dictate the decisions of the private sector property owners, so the
recommendations of the plan would acknowledge the role of the City in supporting economic
development and the kinds of partnerships that needed to be developed. She provided slides of
the overview of the project, including the timeline. They were in the diagnostic phase and
would then move to strategy. The assessment looked at four elements – market analysis, 
administrative capacity at the local level and partner assessment, business environment
assessment with a sales tax analysis and a hospitality and tourism assessment, and the physical
environment City-wide and for each district. Their focus was on the commercial districts, which
were the most significant tax-based contributors and had to be best-in-class environments to
remain competitive. She discussed community serving centers and neighborhood serving
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
centers. She explained how all those districts existed in a very complicated ecosystem with
landlord/ management, tenant, and consumer, and she outlined the role of the public sector. 
She acknowledged that there were a number of global and national trends impacting the
success of many downtown environments, and their recommendations
existed with that
recognition. She discussed regulatory and municipal codes, and it came to their attention that
Palo Alto had incredibly regulated environments, which made it challenging for businesses to
decipher whether they could locate in certain places. The rules needed to be examined and
some degree of permissiveness
allowed. She suggested considering removing the Retail
Preservation Ordinance citywide. The goal of the diagnostic was to understand and use a data-
driven approach to acknowledge deficiencies and where improvement was needed. There were
three takeaways, which were reinforcing hierarchy of place, improving accessibility, and
adopting polices that would reflect changing market conditions. 
Streetsense Consultant Anya Chan walked through the retail market assessment. The Council
should have the full report with appendix. They were specialists in retail environments, and
their approach to understanding retail was very nuanced and comprehensive. They had started
by doing a deep dive in the competitive landscape to assess the competition’ s impact on retail
districts within the city. They looked at competition
regionally
as well as locally. She
commented on regional retail and locally serving retail competition. She mentioned that big-
box retailers, which were concentrated along the periphery of the city, resulted in a leakage of
resident dollars leaving the city. Their competitive
assessment
served as the basis for
understanding the regional dynamics and the retail opportunity within the city. She specified
what the competitive assessment identified, which would determine the retail opportunity. She
spoke of the trade areas. She noted the findings of an impact analysis they conducted that
measured the effects of hybrid work schedules for office-based employees. Building back the
daytime population was critical in supporting additional retail and the retail ecosystem. She
outlined the retail demand projections their analysis found. As part of the competitive analysis, 
they examined entertainment and other uses that were not considered traditional retail uses, 
which were potential gaps within Palo Alto, and there was opportunity for the City in that area. 
She spoke of the organizational landscape and the economic development service delivery
mechanisms being weak and was something the downtown districts needed.  
HdL ECONSolutions Principal/ Managing Director Barry Foster provided a background of HdL
Companies. He furnished slides related to sales tax analysis. He addressed local sales tax
revenue trends, sales tax revenues and performance of the four areas they had looked at, sales
tax revenues by retail category, and retail sales dollar per capita of cities competing with Palo
Alto. 
Streetsense Consultant Ashley Labadie voiced that a three-part analysis had been performed
for the physical assessment looking at the public and private realm elements that informed
best-in-class competitive retail districts of all studied scales, access and connectivity of
transportation networks, and a SWOT analysis for each district. They saw a lack of bus
redundancy in parts of the city around neighborhood- serving districts but recognized that
coverage would soon be addressed with an on-demand shuttle service, which they thought
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
would be helpful. They believed better signage, bike lane markings, and consideration for
micro-mobility programs were needed to complete the bicycle network. She noted that the
SWOT analysis looked at strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats, and she detailed
the needed improvements for downtown, California Avenue, and neighborhood
centers. 
Recommendations
for improvements
should be focused on where there was a lack of
stewardship, bifurcated ownership, lack of physical cohesion, and other needed public realm
improvements.  
Public Comment
Charlie Weidanz stated the Palo Alto Chamber of Commerce had recently been active in
participating with stakeholders and Streetsense. He asked that a more flexible zoning structure
be considered and that more clarity be provided regarding what was and was not allowed to
aide tenants. The Chamber and its members were here to partner and help move economic
development forward.  
Vice Mayor Stone stated the diagnostic report often compared Palo Alto to national trends, and
he asked how Palo Alto compared more to local jurisdictions, especially in terms of vacancy
rates and retail rents, and why the vacancy rate was higher on California Avenue. He inquired
what types of amendments in the zoning code would provide the needed flexibility while also
still maintaining community- serving businesses that residents needed and wanted.  
Streetsense Consultant Ortiz declared they had compared rents in each of the districts, and
there had been a deeper dive into a tenant stack-up against each of Palo Alto’s districts, which
had not been covered in the presentation. Regarding vacancy rates, the administrative analysis
highlighted the challenges neighborhood- and resident-serving businesses had locating in a
place they desired, and there had been delays in getting through the permitting process due to
a highly regulated environment, and it would make sense to remove those hurdles. As for
zoning codes, there was a very specific set of uses in the presentation that were community
serving, such as beauty shops, etc., which had a number of restrictions. Palo Alto not having a
single table of use was a challenge for prospective businesses. Such a table which would enable
businesses to determine if they would be allowed in a district.  
Streetsense Consultant Chan supplied a slide related to rents and expressed that some markets
had limited rental data, but they had looked at it on a regional level. Overall in the region, rents
were elevated, so it was not unique to Palo Alto.  
Council Member Burt queried if there was data to support the assertion that retail rates in Palo
Alto was comparable to surrounding communities and what rate of return-to-office was being
assumed for retail demands going forward. In the future, he wanted to see the data that
asserted there was not a trend toward gradual return to office. He was concerned with drawing
conclusions in a firm way based upon an assumption that office occupancy would remain the
same as today. He did not believe retail trends declined citywide before the pandemic. He
expressed that Palo Alto had recent data related to retail trends and asked if Streetsense had
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
that data. He was concerned the presentation did not articulate distinctions in retail trends
citywide versus certain areas.  
Streetsense Consultant Chan stated that retail rent for University Avenue was higher than
surrounding communities. They were assuming that a current rate of around 40% return to
office would continue within San Jose Metro. There was fluctuation, but it currently stemmed
and had stemmed around the 40% to 50% mark, and it was not growing among tech workers. 
The data showed return to office had not grown.  
Streetsense Consultant Ortiz noted the Federal Reserve recently indicated concerns about the
office market. She brought up the side with the guiding principles and wanted to make sure
they were headed in the right direction for the City. 
HdL ECONSolutions Principal/ Managing Director Foster indicated it was accurate that retail
trends did not decline citywide before the pandemic. He had not seen more recent data
regarding retail trends. They received fourth quarter information from the State this week. 
They had looked at third quarter, and it was continuing to grow. He noted that some businesses
on California Avenue were still struggling and were not back to pre-pandemic in terms of
margins and cash flow.  
Streetsense Consultant Ortiz wanted to make sure Council was comfortable with the guiding
principles as it was the basis of the strategic and tactical recommendations coming next. She
would provide additional information related to an increase in return to work, but the tech
industry was not returning to work.  
Council Member Burt agreed with the guiding principles. He did not think there was an
adequate basis for the assertion that the number of square feet would exceed present and
future need in retail. 
Council Member Veenker asked if, related to daytime demand, the number of Palo Altans
working from home had been studied and if the expected increased housing had been factored
in related to residential uses. She inquired why Edgewood Shopping Center and El Camino Real
were not included.  
Streetsense Consultant Chan indicated the future population growth was accounted for
through the residential pipeline, but density had to be significant to drive demand.  
Streetsense Consultant Ortiz discussed University Avenue not being able to succeed with Palo
Altans’ spending alone and it needing to be a destination, and California Avenue needed to
embrace and expand to be resident and community serving. Their scope of work at the outset
was informed by a desire to look at downtown areas and concentrations of retail activity. They
also looked at where the most impact was from on the sales tax front. A mixture of decisions
went into what areas were chosen.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
Assistant to the City Manager Steve Guagliardo noted that Edgewood was classified firmly as a
neighborhood shopping center. The recommendations for Midtown and Charleston focused on
ways to activate the neighborhood serving retail. Recommendations would probably be applied
to Edgewood and other likeminded districts moving forward.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked how retail would be incentivized in the San Antonio-
Charleston corridor. She was eager to incentivize and inspire more nontraditional businesses
coming to Palo Alto.   
Assistant to the City Manager Guagliardo pulled up a map showing demand and options related
to outside city borders. Regulatory overlays, etc., made it less clear what business could be
sited where and made it confusing for perspective vendors, so through this development
strategy, a single use table could become the guiding cornerstone of what business could be set
up and where, etc., which would make it easier to navigate the City process. 
Streetsense Consultant Ortiz discussed spending being captured by competitors and businesses
choosing not to locate where demand was already being met. They were not making
recommendations to pursue new retail when trends suggested shrinkage and softening of
brick-and-mortar opportunities. They wanted Palo Alto to reinvest in existing districts and
reduce rate vacancies rather than adding more retail that would compete with surrounding
areas.  
Council Member Lauing assumed office traffic would not come back to pre-pandemic levels, 
and thought rightsizing needed to be done. He believed Streetsense was going in the right
direction. He spoke of promoting some of the smaller areas. He queried if there were guidelines
that could bring about an assortment of stores. He was endorsing looking at a lot of zoning
changes. He believed there needed to be a transition to more housing in downtown, which
could mean people frequenting local businesses.  
Streetsense Consultant Ortiz indicated they wanted to go in the direction of stewardship. As for
guidelines for an assortment of stores, she preferred incentivizing desired businesses. A start
may be to look at the table of uses and removing some restrictions.  
Council Member Tanaka did not think the price of rent was the reason for vacancies. He
believed a key issue was people working from home, which could be solved with dense housing. 
He thought there should be some sort of draw to certain areas and incentives for businesses to
locate in Palo Alto. He opined there should be tax incentives and acceleration and easing of the
permitting process. He thought there should be a six-month timeline, not two years, for
parklets, outdoor dining, etc., on University Avenue and California Avenue. He encouraged staff
to
get
the
downtown
plans
settled
quickly. He
supported
most
of
Streetsense’ s
recommendations. He asked that the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank be considered and how it
could affect the business environment.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
Mayor Kou agreed with adding the neighborhood center, such as Edgewood, San Antonio, and
South Palo Alto, to the study. She explained why work-at-home should be looked at realistically. 
She did not see much analysis of number of people using vehicles to go to shopping areas
downtown and California Avenue. She agreed that there needed be an assortment of stores. 
She addressed the local retail sales tax revenue being higher than pre-pandemic. There needed
to be a focus on business owners having understanding, stability, and predictability. Parking
policies needed to be addressed. She wanted to ensure historical data was being considered in
terms of how transitions had happened for tech businesses, etc. She questioned how the
funding would take place and what organizations or committees would ensure street cleaning, 
etc. She requested a timeline for items coming back to Council and questioned if there would
be community engagement with all the stakeholders.  
Streetsense
Consultant Ortiz stated their recommendations
were tactical and identified
projects, programs, and interventions, outlined funding that might be required, and looked at
partners
necessary
to
advance
recommendations. 
A
rubric
was
applied
to
each
recommendation, so it was a true roadmap to execution over the next three to five years.  
Assistant to the City Manager Guagliardo commented they had initially anticipated returning to
Council in June for the third discussion, which would focus on the recommendations, the
outgrowth from the guiding principles, and getting to the tactical level and the road that would
give all stakeholders predictability in the sense of what would be coming next. With the current
conversation and general affirmation of the guiding principles, Streetsense would take the data
and the guiding principles and develop the roadmap. The work product coming back to Council
would be the discussion of investments and returns and how the comprehensive economic
development strategy would be set up. As for community engagement with stakeholders, 
people could be brought into the conversation. The process needed to include engagement
with partners.   
Streetsense Consultant Ortiz stated she could be prepared to come back in June.  
2. 
Prescreening Study Session Regarding a Rezone Request to Amend Planned Community
2343 ( PC 2343) for the Property Located at 2901-2905 Middlefield Rd and Rezone 702
Ellsworth Place to R1 Zone for Development of a One-Story Single-Family Residence
ACTION: None Taken
Chief Planning Official Amy French indicated that for this study session a prescreening was
required for legislative changes and was intended to solicit early feedback. The Council
members should refrain from forming settled opinions supporting or opposing the project. She
furnished slides. She gave a history of 792 Ellsworth from 1926 to 1967. They were in a period
of discovery with neighbors and staff performing research for greater understanding of the
history. She discussed the existing four lots and the existing PC. She specified what the owner
was requesting. She presented a table and a map showing Ellsworth Place with the substandard
R1 and R2 lots. 705 Ellsworth was the only lot on the street that was not substandard. She
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
explained the criteria needed for R1 and R2 lots to be considered substandard. There had been
conversations with neighbors, and they had sent correspondence to the Council and staff. She
listed eight concerns neighbors had. Staff recommended conducting the prescreening process. 
There were a number of people who wanted to speak, and the applicants were present to
present their proposal. She noted that comments were not binding on the City or the applicant. 
A formal rezoning application had also been submitted, which would be evaluated, then
presented to the PTC and then come back to Council.  
Hayes Group Architect Ken Hayes voiced that the prescreening was for consideration of
amending a 56-year-old PC ordinance involving 2 parcels of land, correct a zoning map error
that had persisted for 56 years, create an opportunity for a new single-family home, provide
parking on 1 parcel that conformed
to the latest City requirements, and modify an
ingress/ egress easement to access other properties on Ellsworth. He specified what the existing
PC involved. RLD Land bought the property in 2017. He outlined what the zoning map at the
time showed. RLD Land sold the property to Mr. Nitin Handa, who planned on building an
approximately 1,900 square foot, 1-story home. Mr. Handa had been informed the property
had not been zoned R1 when he submitted plans for a building permit to the City. He shared
slides showing the property. The goal of the owner was to extract 702 Ellsworth from the PC
ordinance by amendment of the development plan, provide compliant, required parking for the
apartment building that would be entirely on the apartment building property, and make 702
Ellsworth an R1 zoned property where a new home could be built. He presented the original
site plan with 12 apartments that required 20 parking spaces at the time, but only 16 spaces
were now required. He explained where the parking spaces would be created in the new plan. 
He described that there would be space for a delivery van. He concluded by saying a previously
unknown City mapping error was relied on by all parties, which resulted in a situation that
could be easily rectified with the PC amendment
and at the same time provide an
ingress/ egress easement that could be expanded to include the 13 parcels down Ellsworth and
a site plan for temporary truck deliveries. RLD Land requested City Council support amending
the development plan, to right-size the parking, and to provide an opportunity for a single-
family home.  
Applicant Nitin Handa reiterated that they purchased the lot in November 2022 because the
seller and the City told them it was zoned R1 and that a single-family home could be built. They
were proposing to build exactly what the City told them they could build. He had been speaking
to one neighbor, Kristen A. Van Fleet, who had been representing other neighbors. They agreed
on six of seven items. What they did not agree on was whether the house should be one or two
stories.  
Public Comments
Kristen A. Van Fleet was speaking on behalf of Hanh Nguyen, Chin Chong, Tsing Xue, Yevgeny
Yoni" Khasin. She had been a homeowner on Ellsworth Place for almost 19 years. She spoke of
problems they had with circulation on the street since the fence was installed, and they wanted
it removed. She explained that the fence was dangerous. Putting a fence on the 20-foot line
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
would make the street one lane. She spoke of possible problems with delivery trucks. She
addressed the problems with the apartments losing eight parking spots. She explained why
residents had put in pavers. She mentioned blind corners, which put children at risk on the
sidewalk, and there had been a number of fender-benders. In researching, they found that in
Ordinance 1810 the driveway approach was supposed to have been widened but never was, so
they were asking for that now. She questioned who owned the road. In their research, it
showed they all had joint ingress/ egress based on joint tendency deeds. A surveyor mapped
their deeds and found where the road split. According to Santa Clara County maps, Palo Alto
had owned the street since 1968. She spoke of discrepancies in details regarding the address, 
the application, etc. They had asked for a letter to be included in the packet, which represented
every house, which she thought the letter was added to the packet today. They wanted the
fence removed, circulation back on the street, and for their street and neighborhood to be
integrated with the apartments.  
Paul Bigbee, speaking on behalf of Susan Light, Charlie " Chuck" Effinger, and On Chong, Shan
Wang, lived on Ellsworth. He had concerns around safety and circulation and the need to clarify
that situation. He spoke of bicycling being hazardous in the area, and stated the situation had
to be remedied.  
Robyn Ziegler had lived on Ellsworth
Place for over 35 years and specified that the
entrance/ exit of Ellsworth Place at Middlefield Road was treacherous and requested it be
expanded for more flexibility for vehicles and that there be no obstruction.  
Robert Chen addressed that historically the PC 2343 ordinance required the parking lot to be
integrated with the apartment development. Documents indicated the City and the apartment
developer understood Ellsworth Place needed to be widened. The [ inaudible] served as an
easement for the single-family homes and the apartment tenants. He also said that takeoff
would cause a lot of public safety issues. He commented that protected trees had been cut. He
spoke of the setup of the chain link fence and possible violation of zoning.  
Bhanu Lyer, a resident of Ellsworth Place since 1998, focused on the intersection being unsafe. 
She wanted [ inaudible] unraveled, not cut. She remarked that originally it was an apartment
complex and asked Council to look at what it was meant to be historically and that the
residents’ requests be considered.  
Sherri Furman, Chair of the Midtown Residents Association, supported the concerns of the
residents of Ellsworth Place. They had outlined in a letter to Council problems with the
proposal, which included rezoning and removal of the parking lot. She opined that the
proposed replacement parking was problematic and dangerous and was not adequate nor
compliant. She noted that the pictures in the presentation did not do justice to the problems
being faced and recommended Council members visit the site.   
Lynn Chiapella presented a document from the City website that showed Ellsworth Place was a
private street and thought the facts should have been understood. She read the motion from
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
the Council meeting of March 13, 1967, which referenced that a study of the area was to be
done, and she requested that be researched. She addressed the intersection being dangerous.  
Jeff Levinsky requested the City not be involved in this issue as the lack of disclosure to the
buyer by the owner was not the fault of the City. He explained the problems that could be
caused by rezoning. He asked that the PC be preserved. 
Hayes Group Architect Hayes remarked they had relied upon City documents regarding zoning
and thought their proposal was a reasonable solution. They were willing to work with the
neighbors but thought some asks went too far. Widening of the driveway discussed in the 1958
PC had been changed in 1967 when PC 2343 was approved. They believed they could provide
compliant parking on the apartment site. Hopefully they could resolve how delivery trucks
would be handled. Perhaps Mr. Handa could provide a little more space in the front. 
Applicant Handa reiterated that when he purchased the lot he was told by the seller and the
City that it was an R1 zoned lot and could be built on. He did not think building a home on the
site would increase or decrease the safety concern of the street being 20 feet wide.  
City Attorney Molly Stump emphasized that this was a study session, that it was preliminary
and that there was not an application formally before Council. Council members were
encouraged to keep an open mind and not come to a settled position on how a formal project
application, once filed, would be decided.  
Mayor Kou understood the PC was created for four parcels, so she was perplexed by Parcel A4
being split off from the PC, which helped determine the entire project. She was surprised by the
lack of due diligence by the buyer. She questioned how 700 Ellsworth Place came up in the MLS
listing. She indicated it would be prudent to determine who owned the length of Ellsworth. She
opined that PCs should stay intact. She did not believe moving the parking to Sutter or within
the apartments would address the parking problem.  
Richard Dewey answered, regarding the MLS listing, it was a range of numbers that they were
told was 700 to 704 or 706, so they picked 700, and it was a number for marketing reasons
only.  
Applicant Handa expressed they did their due diligence and went to the City to ensure it was R1
and zoned to build a single-family home, and they had evidence in writing from the City
confirming that. They also relied on the title company and got a clean title. There was also a
real estate agent involved in the transaction that represented both sides.  
Council Member Burt thought there were solutions that could meet the interests of all three
parties but that it would take more work. He asked if the parcel was allowed to be separated
from the balance of the PC if the zoning density on the balance of the parcel would allow for 27
units an acre or it would be superseded by the fact it was a PC or would it be a modification to a
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
PC; if it was an RM20 underlying; and if a two-story home would be permissible or what would
allow for such on that site.  
Chief Planning Official French remarked it was a PC, so it was not standard zoning that set forth
density per acre. A PC modification would be the formal application. Regarding an underlying
RM20, there was nothing underlying. The underlying zoning prior to the first PC was R3G, which
did not exist as a zone. It would take an amendment to the PC to allow a two-story home on the
parcel. He addressed two-story ADUs being allowed but a two-story building on a substandard
lot not being allowed, so he was interested in that approach in conjunction with looking at the
ingress and egress and how to make it safer, having more setback for parking off the lane, 
making sure there would be line of sight going on to Middlefield, and issues of delivery drop-
offs and parking. 
Planning and Transportation Director Jon Lait indicated if Council supported the application
request to zone 700-702 Ellsworth Place to R1, it would not meet lot area requirements, but it
would not be a substandard lot, which was important to the issue of the second story. A second
story would be a permitted activity if the lot were distinguished as an R1 parcel.  
Vice Mayor Stone inquired if the sale of the house was contingent upon the applicant being
allowed to build on the property and if they were not allowed to build, they could sell it back to
the original owner. Given that the PC zoning was improperly designated on the zoning maps
and the GIS Parcel Report, he questioned where the proper designation could have been found
by the property owner. He asked if proper due diligence had been done. He queried why
heritage oaks on the subject property were removed, if the City approved the removal, and if
the City should not have issued the permits because it was assumed to be an R1 zone. He had
personally seen several near accidents in the intersection and thought safety had to win out in
the weighing of interests. He was curious if some of Council Member Burt’s suggestions could
alleviate some of the concerns, if there could be expansion, or the City could buy the property, 
etc. If a house being constructed would made it more dangerous, he did not see reason for the
project to move forward, but there were a lot of unknowns, and he was interested to see
revisions to the plans.  
Richard Dewey specified it was not the case that the applicant could sell the property back to
the original owner if it was determined the property could not be built on.  
Chief Planning Official French declared the proper designation could have been found by doing
a deep dive into Council minutes, researching whether there had been a rezoning between
1967 to present, and unearthing the PC Ordinance 2343 and not finding any evidence to the
contrary. Concerning the removal of heritage oaks, staff had relied on the R1 zoning on the map
and the oaks were less than the diameter in the Tree Technical Manual, etc., so they did not
meet the size of protected oak trees in 2018.  
Director Lait commented the kind of research Chief Planning Official French outlined was a high
expectation for the sale of a property. Staff had done the research based on information they
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
received from residents in the area, and it would not have been uncovered in the ordinary
course of business. With regard to the removal of heritage oaks, the trees were not protected
under the ordinance. Had they known it was a PC, they probably would have done more
research into the development plans to understand if it was part of the development proposal, 
etc. Additional analysis was not done because they were not aware of the legislative actions
that proceeded it. It was hard to say if it would have been allowed.  
Mayor Kou remarked the level of due diligence Chief Planning Official French outlined was far
beyond what was expected, although the intentions of the buyer had to be taken into
consideration and investigated. She noted it was a representation of both buyer and seller.  
Council Member Lauing expressed that the problem of access on Middlefield needed to be
addressed. He queried if the ownership of the street was a joint tenancy and requested the
claim of joint tenancy be investigated. He asked what the City would be looking for in terms of
setbacks in relation to the fence for a potential R1 home; where the City would allow the front
of the lot to be; and the legality of the proposed use of the easement by the City. He was trying
to determine what the options were for the easement and who would control what would
happen. If the City controlled the easement, the City could dictate space and setbacks. He
inquired if the City owned the Ellsworth Place road how wide the Middlefield entrance would
need to be. He queried if it was random and part of the normal process that the apartments
were turned into an RM20 in 2019, if the application was correct regarding the number of
parking spaces, and if the current owner of the apartment building intended to just maintain
what they had. He stated that safety and fairness to parties had to drive a lot of the decisions.  
Chief Planning Official French understood the entire street that was on Mr. Handa’ s property
was owned by Mr. Handa with an easement across it, and they were researching deeds to
determine who owned the remainder of the street down Ellsworth. Setbacks in relation to the
fence would be determined upon further study. The applicant was proposing 10 feet from the
southerly edge of Ellsworth roadway to the proposed home. As for where the front of the lot
would be, the parcel lines were not proposed to change. Mr. Handa’s parcel ended at the same
location as the southerly property line of Mr. Dewey’s apartment parcel. The current dimension
of that property street was 20 feet. If a new subdivision were proposed, it would be 32 feet
wide. The apartments being turned into an RM20 was a program of the Housing Element. The
RM15 zoned properties were upzoned to RM20. With respect to parking, the number of spaces
for 12 units was 16 spaces, and as part of the application, the current owner of the apartment
building intended to rent as they were with the additional 4 parking spaces on site. 
Director Lait noted regarding the legality of the proposed use of the easement by the City that
there was much to be determined in terms of access. He spoke of the easement and Ellsworth
Place traversing over the 702 Ellsworth property, so through the process, it could be put in
order with all the appropriate documents. Setbacks or fences from the street would likely be
addressed through the application process. He clearly heard there was concern regarding
pediatricians, bicyclists, and vehicles, so they needed to look at that.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
Council Member Lythcott-Haims was interested in asking the Muwekma Ohlone people their
thoughts on this problem. She commented if the City did not know it was a PC when they
allowed trees to be cut down in 2018, how could Mr. Handa be asked to know more than what
the City knew. She believed he did his due diligence. She was not sure how adding an additional
house added to the safety concerns, and it might actually signal to drivers, etc., that there were
homes and driveways there. She declared that no one in the room was responsible for the
discrepancies related to this item. She asked that the Council proceed with compassion for
everybody involved.  
Mayor Kou added there was a question as to the legality of the application and how a portion
of the PC got separated to be sold. She wanted to be empathetic, but there should also be trust
in the PC system and in zoning.  
Council Member Veenker hoped a solution could be found that would work for everybody. She
looked forwarding to the journey of finding a good resolution.  
Council Member Tanaka questioned how it happened that the applicant was told by the City
this could be done and how to prevent such errors from happening again. He opined it would
be worth looking at prior PCs and getting up to the modern standard to prevent this from
happening again. He was interested in exploring the two-story home idea more.  
Director Lait outlined that in the 1960s the planned community zoning was approved, and the
administrative process of updating the zoning map was not done, and it was only recently
discovered. As for preventing this from happening again, he described how the process was
now done. This may not be the only mistake, and he would love to go back and look at prior
PCs, clean everything up, and get up to the modern standard, but he did not have the resources
to do it.  
The Council took a 10-minute break] 
Agenda Changes, Additions And Deletions
There were none. 
Public Comment
Aram James drew attention to an article by Braden Cartwright regarding a Mountain View
police officer and an article from March 3 titled “ Police Chief to Hold Off Naming Assistant
Chief.” He spoke in opposition of a certain officer being considered for Assistant Chief.  
Talya Schube, a sophomore at Gunn High School and a representative of PASCC, asked that
steps be taken to reduced and eventually stop the use of natural gas in homes and buildings. 
She spoke of gas stoves being detrimental to the environment and impacting people’ s health. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
PASCC hoped to work with the Council to bring awareness to electrification in Palo Alto. They
supported the City’s efforts to achieve climate justice.  
Consent Calendar
3. 
Approve Minutes from February 6, 2023 and February 27, 2023 Meetings
4. 
SECOND READING: Parks and Recreation Commission Recommendation to Adopt an
Ordinance Amending PAMC Section 22.04.220 to Regulate Electric Bicycles and Electric
Coasting Devices in Parks and Open Spaces
5. 
Adopt an Ordinance Adding an On-Demand Transit Fare Fee to the FY 2023 Municipal
Fee Schedule – CEQA Status – Not a Project
AA1. 
Approval of the Office of the City Auditor FY2023 Task Orders
Public Comments
Paul Trainer, speaking on behalf of Terje Oseberg, Curtis Golden, Raj Mashruwala, Jack Van
Damn, had sent emails and a video regarding the E-bike ban on unpaved roads in the Baylands
and believed it should not be done. He went through a presentation. He expressed why he did
not believe E-bikes disturbed wildlife and why the speed of E-bikes was not an issue. He voiced
that the California Department of Motor Vehicles did not consider E-bikes to be motorized
vehicles but were bicycles. He declared what E-bikes did for those needing physical assistance. 
He referenced that the Bay Trail philosophy was to provide a shoreline pass for everyone to
enjoy, and he opined that banning E-bikes was against the philosophy. He did not think the
paved road access into the Baylands for E-bikers was sufficient. He believed the ban in E-bikes
was not a ban on E-bikes but a ban on older people. He asked that Council take more time to
understand what was going on in other cities and to get more up to date.  
Richard White stated that his wife was 72 years old and had had open heart surgery and did not
have the stamina to peddle a bike from Shoreline to the Palo Alto duck pond. It would be sad if
a ban on E-bikes kept them from enjoying that resource. He did not think they were offering
risk to fellow trail users or disturbing wildlife. He asked that an ordinance not be passed, which
would discriminate against that section of the E-bike community. He suggested enforcing a
speed limit for bicycles and E-bikes.  
John Kunz ( in person) had been biking his entire life and had had a DVT that lead to a
pulmonary embolus. He had E-biked very near egrets, and they were not disturbed. He pleaded
that E-bikes not be banned.  
Mike Morganstern ( in person) was 81 years old and not in favor of any E-bike ban, but if one
were to pass, he thought Shoreline should be excluded. He noted that it had gotten dangerous
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
to bike on city streets. He thought walkers disturbed what little wildlife there was in Shoreline
as much as E-bikes. E-bikes really helped him.  
Vincent Wong (in person), a sophomore at Palo Alto High School and leader of the Pali Electric
Vehicle Club and Director of InFocus News, expressed his and the Pali EV Club’s distaste with
the proposed E-bike ban on unpaved roads in Palo Alto. He provided reasons why he thought E-
bikes should be allowed in parks. He proposed a regulated speed limit on certain sections in the
Baylands Nature Reserve rather than a complete ban of E-bikes on unpaved roads.  
Rohan Bhatia (in person), a representative from Palo Alto High School Electronic Vehicle Club, 
opposed preventing E-bike use on unpaved paths. He believed the primary reasons for the
ordinance were environmental harm, safety issues, and noise concerns, and he explained why
these issues were not solved with this ordinance. He opined that putting the ordinance in effect
would reduce the incentives to own an E-bike.  
Rachel Fussell on behalf of People for Bikes Coalition spoke against the proposed ban on E-
bikes. Studies in Jefferson County Colorado showed that there was no material safety
distinction between E-bikes and conventional bike use. She believed E-bikes should have access
to infrastructure designed and designated for bicycle use. Tahoe National Forest conducted a
NEPA assessment, which included several wildlife species, and determined that E-bikes were a
disturbance and that the species were still present and thriving a year after the study. She
believed an outright ban would be premature in the absence of evidence of adverse impacts. 
She discussed E-bikes being a key component to fighting climate change.  
Jay Chesavage ( in person), an E-bike user, noted that the ordinance banned E-bikes as
equipment rather than use, which he thought should be considered carefully. As a rider who
had used both a traditional bicycle and a Class 1 E-bike, he could not identify differences in the
two. His wife, who had pinched nerve issues, rode an E-bike. He opposed the ban on E-bikes in
the Baylands.  
Cedric Pitot de la Beaujardiere spoke on the ordinance regulating transportation modes in parks
and open space. He urged reconsideration of the February 27 decision, to review whether the
amendments were intended, and to reject the ordinance amendment. He expressed that the
amendments impacted all bikes and other types of wheeled devices, not just E-bikes. He
quoted Amendment Section 22.04.220A, and if the ordinance amendment was reapproved, he
urged the City to clearly delineate for each park and trail, whether bikes and strollers, etc., 
would be permitted and to communicate the information to the public and suggested the
information be added to the City’s website and on each park and open space map. He
encouraged the City to review all paths and walkways and set liberal policies allowing all such
vehicles. He thought bad behavior should be regulated, not all bikes and strollers.  
Jose Garcia Franco stated the PRC recommendation had not been based on research or
evidence and organizations, such as People for Bikes, had contacted the PRC and other
committees in January and they had not received a reply, and he thought these issues needed
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
to be revisited and that the PRC should explain its actions. He opined that the rationale of
erring on the side of caution for wildlife had been based on opinion, not evidence. He
understood that the community found a way to share the space in a peaceful manner, and
enacting any restrictions would be a disruption to the status quo. He regarded speed and safety
to be a behavior issue, not an equipment issue. He respectively urged Council to revisit their
vote and remove the initiative from consideration.  
James Bell, a cyclist who owned an E-bike, was against the bike ban. He was concerned of the
impact the ban would have on many others’ abilities to enjoy the outdoors and maintain an
active and healthy lifestyle. He voiced points against the ban. He addressed airplanes posing a
much greater risk to birds, noise, and environmental pollution than E-bikes. He urged Council to
reconsider the ban on E-bikes.  
Jeff Greenfield, Chair of the PRC, declared that PRC took a thorough and thoughtful approach in
the recommendation. He recommended that work be done to keep policy [inaudible]. He noted
that a policy with carveouts for different E-bike classes was not practical or enforceable now
and was something that could be considered. There was lack of sufficient education and
communication about speed limits and etiquette at the preserves for E-bikes and bicycles, 
which could be improved with updates to webpages, etc., and he looked forward to input from
PABAC. He pointed out that National Park permits permitted E-bikes where bicycles were
permitted, but each park superintendent had discretion to selectively restrict E-bikes anywhere
in the park. An extensive impact analysis study was required before opening any pathway to
bikes or E-bikes, which the community lacked.  He asked that this policy be supported and sent
back to PRC for further analysis on creating a policy.  
Aram James opposed the ban. He was 74 years old and was hopeful of riding an E-bike as
peddling a bicycle was a problem. He had filed a public records request, and the City got back to
him very quickly, and there was no record of litigation of bike accidents, including E-bikes. He
advised City Council to reverse their decision. Common sense rules and speeds should be
enforced, not a ban.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims, Tanaka, Burt requested to pull Item 4 and registered no votes
on the item.  
Council Member Burt registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number AA1. 
Mayor Kou noted that four Council members were needed to pull an item if it was a second
reading. She did not see a fourth, so the no votes would be taken. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Stone moved, seconded by Mayor Kou to approve Agenda Item
Numbers 3, 4, 5 & AA1. 
MOTION PASSED Items 3, 5: 7-0
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
MOTION PASSED Item AA1: 6-1, Burt No
MOTION PASSED Item 4: 4-3, Lythcott- Haims, Burt, Tanaka No
Council Member Lythcott-Haims stated, regarding Item 4, that she was concerned that the
Council would deprioritize the experience of older and mobility challenged people for whom E-
bikes provided access to quality of life, etc. She noted that the issue was whether E-bikes were
ridden responsibly. It was suggested a few weeks ago that speed be regulated, and it was
indicated there was not enough staff to monitor that, so she questioned who would monitor
the ban on E-bikes. She noted that over 80% of the emails received from residents two weeks
ago were in favor of the ban, but many seemed to have emanated from a coordinated
campaign, which there was nothing wrong with that, but it made more compelling the emails
received from individuals opposed to the ban who seemed to have written their emails out of
their heartfelt accord. She feared the policy was shortsighted, potentially discriminatory, and
lacked compassion. It also flew in the face of the National Park Service Regulations that
classified E-bikes as the equivalent of bikes in their regulations. She hoped the subject would
one day be reconsidered.  
Council Member Tanaka hoped this could be reconsidered. He thought enforcement would be
difficult and that the ban was discriminatory.  
Council Member Burt spoke against the E-bike ban two weeks ago but agreed to a compromise
to reconsider the issues. The more he heard from the public, the more convinced he was that it
was not a well-considered decision. He thought Class 1 E-bikes should be allowed on unpaved
roads at Arastradero and the Baylands, that a speed limit should be set, and that consideration
should be given to restricting bikes and horses on narrow single-track trails. He opined that
there should be consideration of restricting areas and setting speed limits. He spoke of AA1 and
thought the audit plan was good, but he was concerned that there had been an interim auditor
for over five months, and there had previously been one-on-one meetings with Council
Members, and particularly those on P& S, to input on the audit plan, and the Council as a whole
had not had an opportunity to contribute. He was concerned about the need to specifically look
at wildfire risk under the citywide risk assessment, which was a financial threat and threatened
public health and public safety. He felt the level of risk was under-appraised and that it needed
to be a high priority.  
City Manager Comments
City Manager Ed Shikada provided a storm update, and updates were available on the website. 
They would continue to monitor and provide additional information as conditions dictated. He
noted it was Women’ s History Month and listed upcoming events. There were a number of
surveys on the City’s website on a variety of topics for community members to provide
feedback on. There would be an in-person and virtual community meeting on March 23 at 6
p.m. at the Arrillaga Family Recreation Center on the topic of Quiet Zone along the Caltrain
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
right of way. In reference to upcoming council items, next week the Council would discuss the
Protocols section of the Procedures & Protocols Handbook and hopefully complete the annual
review; on March 27, there would be two study sessions, one on a community engagement
workplan for the year and the other to review potential terms for an extension of the
agreement with Pets in Need for the operation of the Palo Alto Animal Shelter, and a referral to
staff on the perspective
gas utility rebates; and on April 3, there would be follow-up
recommended action from the Police Department on automated license plate recognition
technology, a hearing on a track map for 2850 West Bayshore, and a discussion and direction
on the Measure E site.  
Action Items
6. 
Provide Direction on Permanent Parklet Program Regulations and Proposed Ordinance
and Approval of Budget Amendments in the General Fund, CEQA status – categorically
exempt (15301 and 15304(e)) 
Planning and Transportation Director Jon Lait would walk the Council through the proposed
recommendation, but he noted that it was an effort that involved a lot of staff from many
different departments over the course of years, and the item being brought forward was
further refinement from the work they did in October.  
Associate Consulting Partner Hanna Chan Smyth declared that the purpose of the item was to
review and provide direction on the proposed changes to the parklet standards provided in
Attachment A in the Staff Report, including A) changes related to the parklet size, specifically
providing a maximum of two parallel parking spaces or three angled parking spaces, heaters, 
parklet location, eligibility, design standards, and application requirements, and B) parklet fees
to be collected, specifically the license fee, amendment of the FY2023 budget appropriation for
the General Fund, increasing the public works expenditure for contract services by $85,000, and
decreasing the budget stabilization reserve by $ 85,000. She provided a background of the
proposed Parklet Program. Attachment A reflected staff’s proposed changes since the October
2022 meeting. Council was encouraged to review the standards and identify any concerns or
modifications. The specific topics highlighted for discussion were addressing the size and scale
of parklets, including a size limit up to two spaces; the revised heater standards; the license fee
for use of the public right of way; and the cleaning fee. For size and scale of parklets, staff
recommended limiting parklets to two parallel parking spaces or three angled parking spaces
and would require a Letter of Consent ( LOC) consistent with October 22 Council direction. This
recommendation would scale back the parklet footprints with the objective to balance the
needs of restaurants and businesses with safety requirements. The proposed change also
sought to streamline the program administration for applicants and staff. She explained how
the parallel parking space limit would be applied. She discussed factors involved with the sizing
and scaling of parklets. Regarding
heaters, following Council direction in October, the
permanent standards would include provisions for propane and electric heaters. She outlined
what would be required for the use of propane heaters. Staff recommended establishing five
fees that would be required to establish a parklet under the Permanent Parklet Program, which
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
included an application fee, an annual renewal fee, a cleaning fee, a fully refundable deposit, 
and a license fee for the use of public right of way. Staff sought guidance on the cleaning and
license fee for the use of the public right of way. After reviewing peer city approaches to pricing
the right of way and pricing parklets, staff proposed establishing a rate per square foot using
current ground-floor retail lease rates and applying a discount to account for the public right of
way being unfinished and being directly adjacent to the travel lane. Using ground-floor retail
rates from CoStar, there were three potential rates to inform the license fee, which were
downtown rates, the non-downtown areas, and all of Palo Alto combined. She presented a
table comparing the rate per square foot and corresponding cost for one or two parallel spaces
and a table comparing fees for other jurisdictions. She noted there was an error on the table in
the Staff Report, which showed the total first year sum at the bottom to be 160 square feet, but
it should have been 320 square feet as shown in the table she presented. In October 2022, 
Council directed staff to consider a fee for the increased cleaning associated with parklets; 
however, she outlined why it was challenging to calculate a cleaning fee, so staff was not
prepared to offer a recommendation. Staff preferred not to tie a cleaning fee to parklets, and
she presented a table of a couple options for cleaning in the downtown, and staff sought
Council’ s direction on this topic. She mentioned that over the past 2½ years over 40 temporary
parklet permits had been issued, and she remarked on the additional hours of work required by
Public Works staff and other departments. It was anticipated that a large percentage of the
parklet permit holders would transition to the permanent program, so the Public Works
Department would require staffing and resources to implement the permanent program. In
terms of next steps, following direction today, staff would refine the standards and program
operations as needed and return in the spring with a formal ordinance to enact the program. 
The Temporary Parklet Program was authorized through June 2023. Continuing the Temporary
Parklet Program would require an ordinance amendment, and staff could bring an amendment
to Council in early April to extend the program to the end of the year or any other date, and it
could be adjusted if the permanent program ordinance was adopted in the meantime. She
highlighted a couple changes to Attachment A – Packet Page 94, Setbacks, Item C should reflect
a 15-foot setback, not a 5-foot setback, and Packet Page 91, 2B, should read “ parklets with an
angled parking space are permitted to occupy up to 3 parking spaces,” and should not include
or the width of the applicant’ s storefront, whichever is less,” and the LOC requirement would
apply.  
Director Jon Lait reiterated that the parklet design standards would apply to the University
Avenue area and would include the car-free portion of Ramona Avenue. It would also apply in
the area of California Avenue but would not extend to the car-free zone, as that was a separate
process that staff would come back to Council with. The inclusion of the car-free areas of
Ramona Avenue was subject to Council discretion.  
Mayor Kou asked if some of the side streets on California Avenue that had parklets was part of
the discussion. 
Director Lait confirmed that was correct.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked for confirmation that the proposed rules would apply to
the car-free section of Ramona but not the car-free section of California. 
Director Lait indicated that was correct.  
Council Member Lauing asked if there would be exceptions to two parking spaces in the event a
lot spanned more than two spaces and said lot did not interfere with any other building; if the
Consent Letter implied parking spaces could be beyond two if there was no objection; and if the
decision to use electric and propane heating was based on feedback from retailers.  
Director Lait declared there would be uniformity in the application. The way it was proposed
was to keep the parklet size to two parallel parking spaces maximum, which was referenced in
the Staff Report. There was opportunity to extend to two parking spaces if the storefront was
smaller than two parallel spaces. The decision to use electric and propane heating was based on
direction from City Council in October.  
Council Member Burt asked if there would be an issue of having more than two parking spaces
if there were two separate structures and if one issue was technical on the structure size and
another issue that was value based. He asked if cities other than the three mentioned in the
Staff Report restricted parking to two spaces and why the City was being more restrictive
regarding propane use. 
Director Lait mentioned that the two-space recommendation was based on studies of what
other cities had done to balance use of the public right of way for private interest and to have
minimal impact. He did not know that propane use was more restrictive other than setting the
policy. 
City Manager Ed Shikada noted restroom capacity and other design requirements were also
factors for an additional structure.  
Associate Consulting Partner Smyth explained the different approaches to parking across cities
in the Bay Area.  
Fire Marshall Tamara Jasso declared permits had always been required for propane, although
they did not enforce requirements during the pandemic. She did not believe there were any
issues in terms of the fire code related to having more than two parking spaces if there were
two separate structures under 350 square feet. There could possibly be an issue on the building
code side.  
Vice Mayor Stone asked what the approximate square footage of two parallel parking spots
was; if there was an average length of a storefront in downtown; if a propane tank emitted
0.024 metric tons per year; and if parklet owners could be fined or charged for cleaning based
on cleaning needs, and he was curious if other cities did something similar.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
Associate Consulting Partner Smyth noted that two parallel parking spots would be 320 square
feet.  
Director Lait was not aware of having an estimate for average length of a storefront in
downtown. A crude estimate was most lots were 50 feet, and if there were two tenants, it
would be 25 feet. He mentioned that cleaning involved not only litter but spills on sidewalks. 
Assistant Director of Public Works Holly Boyd specified that each 5-gallon propane tank emitted
0.024 metric tons. She did not think administrative citations covered cleaning fees and was
something she would have to discuss with the City Attorney’ s office.  
City Manager Shikada remarked that implementing cleaning fees or fines was challenging with
respect to compliance.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims inquired
as to the concerns regarding ambient sound
emanating from a parklet rather than the interior of a building. She felt amplified sound should
be permitted going forward. 
Director Lait specified that they had received direction from City Council in October related to
amplified sound. It was presumably related to noise intrusions. It was an easy editing fix if the
Council wanted to permit amplified sound.  
Council Member Tanaka queried as to the status of the overall streetscape design for California
Avenue and requested it be accelerated; how the restroom situation would be affected if the
capacity outside were to increase; and if the downtown parking load had been monitored, and
he suggested there be a plan for increased capacity of garages. 
City Manager Shikada answered that the overall streetscape design for California Avenue was in
progress. There had been a community workshop a couple weeks ago. They were anticipating
having a design concept by the end of the calendar year. Even if the design was accelerated, 
reconstruction
was
likely to
be
years
out
due to
evaluating
options, developing
a
recommendation, Council approval, etc. As for capacity, there was a tradeoff for area available
for vehicle parking versus parklet use.  
Assistant Director Boyd hoped to have an improved concept plan for the California Avenue
streetscape design presented to Council by the end of the calendar year.  
Director Lait specified that a parklet size limit had been proposed to address the restroom
situation. Council could decide to apply a different restroom standard.  
Chief Transportation Official Philip Kamhi noted there would be parking spaces lost through
parklets, and there was no plan to offset new spaces in the garage. There was a lot of existing
capacity in the garages. Approximately 50% of the permits had been sold in the downtown area
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 21 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
and significantly less in the California Avenue area. They were preparing to conduct parking
counts. 
Council Member Veenker questioned if the LOC would allow parking to go beyond the front
space of the business but not beyond 320 feet or the two-spot limit. 
Associate Consulting Partner Smyth affirmed that was correct.  
Public Comments
Nancy Coupal, founder and CEO of Coupa Café, voiced the City should not lose sight of the fact
that the parklet program was designed to enhance the quality of life for residents and the
greater community. She opined that people wanted outdoor dining due to COVID and wanting
to be outdoors, and that it did not affect the number of people using the restrooms. She
addressed why some landlords objected to parklets. She urged Council to utilize the findings of
the studies related to economic development and fashion guidelines for a coherent plan.  
Tim Pham, the business manager of Tea Time and Lisa's Tea Treasures, requested Council
consider permanent parklets for Ramona Avenue. He addressed not being able to build a
parklet for Tea Time due to rainwater accumulation, which he had sent emails to the Planning
Department asking for a solution and had not received a reply. He claimed that the storage of
propane tanks was not realistic and that electricity was not feasible with their historical
building.  
Clayton Adelhelm, managing partner at Local Union 271 restaurant, addressed the goal of the
parklets. He opined that enhancements of parklets should not require landlord consent as the
streets were owned by the City. He had received a LOC from Restoration Hardware, but consent
was revoked when Sand Hill Property purchased the property, and he outlined the problems
that caused. He opposed limiting the parklet to two parking spots and believed the size of the
parking spots needed to be revisited. He opposed cleaning fees. He believed that changing the
rules and regulations were at the expense of small business owners.  
Giuseppe Carrubba, Manager of Osteria, echoed what fellow restaurant owners had said. He
wanted things to be more homogeneous in terms of parklet size, etc. He did not agree with
landlord consent and would propose a right of first refusal if a new tenant wanted to use a
space. He would love to see California Avenue addressed soon.  
Megan Kawkab, co-owner of The Patio, had a parklet. She supported conformity but the
number of parking spaces concerned her. She wanted to know if temporary parklets would
need to be reconstructed as permanent parklets.  
John Shenk with Thoits Brothers requested that a permanent parklet program not be approved
and that temporary parklet permits be extended. He opined that plans to revitalize the city
would make parklets obsolete in favor of a best design, and a part of the plan may be to
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 22 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
convert parking areas to parklets. He did not agree with waiving restroom and building and fire
code standards. He asked that the Ramona historic district be respected in design and access.  
Cedric Pitot de la Beaujardiere supported the parklet program. He suggested there be
provisions for handling oversized existing parklets and allowing those uses to continue and to
minimize fees.  
MOTION: Council Member Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to table this item
to take up Item AA2.   
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
AA2. 
Review Revised list of Applicants for open Board and Commission Openings on the
Historic
Resources
Board, Human
Relations
Commission, Parks
and
Recreation
Commission, Planning and Transportation Commission, Utilities Advisory Commission
and provide direction for interviews and appointments. 
City Clerk Lesley Milton declared the item was a continuation from last week when Council
directed allowing Council members to nominate up to six individuals for the PRC, up to five
individuals or PTC, and up to six individuals for the UAC. They received nominations, which
eliminated five individuals, but there were still many candidates, and it was up to Council to
discuss how to proceed with reviewing the applications, who to interview, and how to proceed
with the appointments.  
Council Member Veenker asked how many received one vote and how many received four or
more votes, as number of votes could determine cuts and enable getting the numbers to a
more manageable size.  
City Clerk Milton shared a slide showing number of nominations ( zero to six) for each of the
three commissions. Council could potentially forward those who received more than two
nominations to the interview process or something to that effect.  
Public Comments
There were no requests to speak. 
Council Member Lauing asked if there was a plan for interviewing. 
Council Member commented that interviews had been staggered in the past. The number of
applications in these three commissions had doubled from historic numbers. He did not think
the Council had anticipated this volume.  
Council Member Veenker asked about how long an interview typically was per applicant.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 23 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
City Clerk Milton declared that in the past interviews were 10 minutes for all commissions but
15 minutes for the PTC. That was not in the Board & Commission Handbook but was past
practice.  
Council Member Lauing commented that it had been discussed in the last meeting the
interviews being spread out over weeks or months and that interviews be prioritized by need or
by number of applications. He noted UAC had called this month’ s meeting because they did not
have a quorum.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims noted that it would take close to 10 hours to interview the
applicants, and Council was incapable of adding 10 hours of meetings to March in light of the
other work of the Council.  
Council Member Lauing stated interviews could be extended into May. 
Discussion ensured regarding interview time, eliminating applicants with few nominations, and
adding “ wildcard” nominations.  
MOTION: Vice Mayor Stone moved, seconded by Council Member Veenker to interview
applicants that received two or more nominations from Council Members and add that each
Council Member may make one additional “ wildcard” nomination after seeing the list. 
Mayor Kou wanted to ensure this would be fair to the applicants and that it would not make
compromises.  
City Attorney Molly Stump declared it was a judgement call and was a reasonable way to
proceed.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
Council Member Lauing suggested Planning Commissioner interviews be 10 minutes instead of
15 minutes.  
Mayor Kou stated that could be structured into the motion on return to Council, but she
mentioned that Madam Clerk said it was okay.  
City Manager Ed Shikada clarified this coming together would be dependent on Council’ s ability
to schedule sufficient time.   
City Clerk Milton remarked there was a standing date held for March 31 to interview
candidates, which was a block of 5 hours. They could prioritize the committees with the most
need, and the rest could be scheduled for April as the Council was available.  
Mayor Kou asked that the committees that did not have a quorum be scheduled first. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 24 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
City Clerk Milton acknowledged she would do that.  
The Council returned to Item 6 for discussion after the vote on AA2.   
Council Member Burt suggested not limiting parking spaces to two and encouraged the Council
to consider the City making decisions regarding parking space, as it was public land, and
regarding blocking a neighboring business’ signage, that there be parklets with tables only, no
structures. Concerning cleaning fees, he did not know if there was a way to enable businesses
do their own cleaning. He asked how far into the street parklets were allowed. He thought the
restriction on car-free streets should be to the fire lane rather than protruding into the street. 
He did not want to discourage amplified sound on California Avenue, and thought the issue
should be addressed tonight for University and that Ramona should be discussed another time. 
He was concerned about parklet safety and vehicles and asked about the strength and
requirements of bollards and if they would stop a car. Once information was received on the
affordable housing projects, he wanted to explore additional parking utilizing the impact fees.   
Assistant Director Boyd stated that the parking space was typically seven to eight feet deep and
there needed to be a barrier, so it was six to seven feet.  
Associate Consulting Partner Smyth voiced there was a load requirement for the barriers, and
that the barriers should weigh at least 500 pounds.  
Director Lait would follow up as to the bollards being able to stop a car.  
City Attorney Molly Stump expressed that the City was defending in litigation the parking in-lieu
fund. The Affordable Housing RFI included parking as a component, and she outlined what the
RFI would provide. The in-lieu funds were to be folded into the project for the purpose of
parking. It was for the incremental increase in parking and to substitute for the lost surface
parking, which the details would have to be examined. Council needed to understand the
parking in-lieu funds needed to be spent for that purpose. In relatively short order there
needed to be a plan to do that or the City could withdraw that program and refund those funds. 
Vice Mayor Stone was mostly in agreement with Council Member Burt on the size of parklets. 
He asked that staff discuss the breakup of the structure on continuation of this item. If that was
not possible, he was interested in the parklet size being limited to the two or three parking
spots or the length of the storefront, whichever was greater. He thought the size now was too
restrictive. He supported the right of first refusal with regard to the LOC requirement being that
it was City property. There needed to be a more robust discussion related to fees. He was
interested in some form of discount, as all the fees added together were high. He inquired why
there was a need to significantly increase insurance requirements to businesses and if it was
consistent with surrounding jurisdictions. He hoped there would be more discussion in the
future related to safety issues and grandfathering in existing parklets if there was a LOC from a
neighboring business.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 25 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
Director Lait specified that the insurance was increased due to the roof structure over some
parklets to ensure there was sufficient liability coverage.  
Assistant Director Boyd voiced that the City’s risk manager recommended increasing the
insurance requirements as part of the encroachment permit.  
Associate Consulting Partner Smyth outlined that most jurisdictions had a $ 1M insurance
requirement, but there were a handful with a $2M requirement. 
Council Member Veenker thought there may need to be site-specific curfews for amplified
sound. She felt the cleaning fees should be waived and that there should be more focus on the
license fee with a 70% to 80% discount, which would make the fee about $6,000. If there was a
consent situation, she liked the idea of it being the building owner or the tenant as opposed to
both. She queried if the right of first refusal meant the person operating the business had the
right of first refusal of the space in front of their business, and if they did not take it, then the
other person would get the space without needing consent and if it would go on in perpetuity
or if there would be another right of first refusal if a business changed hands. She asked if the
temporary parklets would have to make changes under the Permanent Parklet Program. She
asked Council Member Burt to restate what he had said about compromise.  
Vice Mayor Stone answered he intended the right of first refusal to be how Council Member
Veenker had described it. Staff had proposed that the right of first refusal would be renewed
yearly and that it would be effective for a year regardless of a business changing hands.  
Director Lait indicated permanent was distinguished from the current temporary standards and
was the sole distinction, so permanent may not be the right word choice to have on the
guidelines, and they could refer to it as just parklet standards. Temporary parklets could stay
under the permanent program if the standards were met.  
Council Member Burt clarified that he spoke of only tables being allowed on an adjacent space
unless the landlord and the tenant consented to a parklet.  
Council Member Veenker mentioned that an option could be the City having designated dining
areas.  
Council Member Burt agreed that that was plausible.  
Council Member Lauing asked if Peninsula Creamery and Taverna would be able have parklets. 
He opined that there needed to be a message that California Avenue would be addressed at
some point. He thought some of the temporary parklets should be grandfathered in and not
have to go through a new process if they could be made compliant and that there should be an
extension for removing temporary parklets if they were not converting to permanent. He did
not want landlords driving decisions and preferred it be the tenant. He requested an
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 26 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
explanation of annual renewals. He thought there were too many fees in general. Regarding
cleaning fees, he gave an example of the City being a landlord and tenants being responsible for
cleanliness, and there could be inspections.   
Director Lait pulled up a map and indicated that parklets would be allowed for Creamery and
Taverna. The annual renewals would not be a discretionary action, but they would be looking
for compliance with the parklet guidelines. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims liked the right-of-first-refusal idea to the tenant, not the
landlord. She was concerned by stories of landlords pressuring their tenants to withhold
consent and particularly if a few landlords owning a number of properties were driving the
decision. She questioned if any of the four businesses referenced on Packet Page 86 that had
been unable to obtain a LOC shared the same landlord. She did not think a small number of
landlords should control the destiny of the city and felt the City should decide what would
happen in those areas. Regarding vacancies, she questioned if rents could be lessened and
vacancy taxes imposed.  
Assistant Director Boyd declared there were three businesses that could not obtain the LOC, 
not four. She did not think any of the three had the same landlord. 
Council Member Tanaka thought it was important that there be all types of parking lots, not
just for affordable housing, and that there should be enough parking for downtowns. He
inquired what would happen to a parklet if a restaurant closed. He was considering the City
doing the cleaning because it would ensure consistency. He voiced why he was thinking about
restroom requirements. He did not like the idea of tents. He opined that the downtown plan
should be accelerated to a six-month plan.  
Assistant Director Boyd noted that a couple restaurants with a parklet had closed, and they
were asking for a deposit fee to cover the cost of removal. Parklets that were removed would
be turned back into parking spots.  
MOTION: Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Stone to continue this item.  
Council Member Tanaka made the motion due to the late hour.  
Vice Mayor Stone agreed with continuing the item due to the late hour. 
Mayor Kou did not think making parklets permanent would include conversations with
Streetsense. She thought Council had to be cognizant of noise concerns in the Ramona District. 
She agreed in looking at Redwood City’s licensing fee and possibly adopting it instead of the
cleaning fee. She believed there needed to be conformity of and regulations for parklets, which
would form expectations for people, and that the City’s best interest should be in the forefront. 
She suggested using the $85K from the budget stabilization reserve for code enforcement or
compliance. She asked if this would be borrowing from the stabilization fund and then parklet
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 27 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/13/2023
fees would reimburse the fund. She opined that the program should no longer be subsidized as
businesses were generating high revenues. She requested there be clarity on the parking
assessment district for California Avenue when this comes back to Council. She understood the
bond had been paid off, but the municipal code stated it was still intact. In the past, that
committee collected funds to pay for cleaning, events, etc. 
Director Lait thought the $85K was to get the program started, but the half-time position was
to help with ensuring compliance.  
Assistant Director Boyd remarked that Public Works staff had been processing and reviewing
encroachment
permits. The $ 85K was to help with consultant support in moving to a
Permanent Parklet Program. The half-time FTE was a supplement until recruitment could be
done. She was not sure if this was borrowing from the stabilization fund and then parklet fees
would reimburse the fund; she supposed it could. She did not think staff considered that and
that it was general funding needed to continue the work.  
City Manager Shikada stated that putting the revenues back into the program would support
the ongoing needs. It ultimately depended on the fee levels set and the ability to cover it. The
parking assessment districts fit under the work being done on car-free streets and Cal Ave and
was not directly connected to the parklets.  
Council Member Burt mentioned that the parking assessment district for California Avenue
lapsed.  
City Attorney Molly Stump stated that the parking assessment districts was a worthy topic, but
the parklets item had many components, and the parking assessment districts was a significant
expansion.  
City Manager Shikada needed to look at the docket to determine a date to continue this item.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
Council Member Questions, Comments, Announcements
Mayor Kou asked that Council meetings on TV sometimes freezing be investigated.  
Council Member Tanaka mentioned Silicon Valley Bank and First Republic Bank and wanted
Council to be cognizant of and sensitive to the economic situation.  
Adjournment
The meeting was adjourned at 11:45 P.M.  
