CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 21 
Special Meeting 
January 9, 2023 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 6:00P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, 
Veenker 
Present Remotely:  
None 
Absent: 
 
 
None 
OATH OF OFFICE  
City Clerk Lesley Milton provided the Oath of Office to new Council Members 
Lauing, Lythcott-Haims and Veenker. 
1. Nomination of Mayor 
Council Member Stone nominated Vice Mayor Kou for Mayor. Vice Mayor 
Kou’s breadth of experience, passion for this work and empathy for those we 
serve will suit her well as Mayor and our city will be a better place for it. She 
is an active emergency services volunteer. Last week during the major 
storms, she was helping fill sandbags. She visited flooded streets and 
monitored creeks. She knocked on the doors of residents whose houses had 
flooded to check in on them and offer a sympathetic ear. She volunteers 
serving food to seniors at La Comida. She has an incredible heart but she is 
not afraid to stand up for what she believes in and tell it like it is. It is a rare 
combination for a leader to be kind but also strong and determined. 
Council Member Tanaka nominated Vice Mayor Kou for Mayor and agreed 
with Council Member Stone’s comments. Vice Mayor Kou’s preparation for 
meetings and her dedication to the community is impressive. Her careful 
deliberation on decisions is admirable. She is considerate. As a body, it is 
important to work together and move things forward for the community. She 
did not hesitate when she was asked to help organize a Stop Asian Hate 
Rally in Palo Alto. As the presiding officer of this meeting, it is important to 
run the meeting efficiently and that different perspectives are heard, which 
she has demonstrated. 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
Vice Mayor Kou thanked Council Members Stone and Tanaka for their 
nominations, which she humbly accepts. She thanked the City of Palo Alto 
employees for coming to work and placing high priority on keeping residents’ 
lives and property safe. She feels blessed and proud to live in this 
community where many people helped others in times of need. We will 
continue to work on community resiliency to address what we have learned 
from this series of atmospheric river storms and continue our discussion on 
key priorities that benefit residents, small businesses and economic 
recovery. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims supported Vice Mayor Kou for Mayor. The 
role of Vice Mayor is critical preparation for the role of Mayor. 
Council Member Veenker supported Vice Mayor Kou for Mayor. Her seven 
years on Council, her service as Vice Mayor this year and her community 
service equip her well for the position. It has been five years since we had a 
woman Mayor and 11 years since we had a person of color as Mayor and 
that was way too long. 
Council Member Lauing gave his full support to Vice Mayor Kou for Mayor. 
She has passion for residents, a work ethic that will not quit, a huge heart, 
she is a fighter and she is ready to lead. 
Mayor Burt echoed the previous comments. He enthusiastically supported 
Vice Mayor Kou’s nomination for Mayor. He has known Vice Mayor Kou for 
more than a dozen years. She has an incessant commitment to the 
community and the people who live and work here. He does not know of 
anyone with greater passion and compassion for our community, who is 
more committed to a job, who prepares more thoroughly and feels greater 
devotion to our community than Vice Mayor Kou. He very much looks 
forward to serving with her. She has been an able and very strong Vice 
Mayor and he appreciated the support she has given him. 
Public Comment #1 Mayor Nomination 
1. Andie Reed lives in Old Palo Alto. Vice Mayor Kou digs down into the 
Staff reports, listens to all parties and acts in the best interests of 
the greater community. We are very fortunate to have someone 
who has lived outside of the States. As Mayor, she will represent all 
sides and interests with thoughtful, caring and fair leadership. 
2. County Supervisor Joe Simitian congratulated new Council Members 
Lauing, Lythcott-Haims and Veenker. Stepping up for public service 
is worthy of special note and he thanked all those who ran. He 
thanked outgoing Council Members DuBois, Filseth and Cormack for 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
their good service to the community. He congratulated Mayor-to-be 
Kou. It was a pleasure working with her, including having him read 
to children on Zoom. He and his office are always available to work 
with the Mayor in partnership to help our common constituents. 
3. Russ Melton serves on the Sunnyvale City Council. His hometown is 
Palo Alto and he graduated from Gunn High School. He thanked the 
three outgoing council members for their hard work on the dais and 
within the community. Their effort was appreciated. He 
congratulated new Council Members Lauing, Lythcott-Haims and 
Veenker. He wished the City of Palo Alto and the City Council all the 
best for a great year ahead. Sunnyvale and Palo Alto have similar 
regional issues, such as housing, transportation, homelessness, 
Caltrain Grade Separation, electrification and high-speed rail. The 
City of Sunnyvale is always happy to chat at any time. 
4. Angie Evans lives in Crescent Park. She is a mom and has lived in 
Palo Alto for nine years. She highlighted some of the things she 
loves about Palo Alto, including our teachers, neighbors she did not 
know until last week who sandbagged her house because they were 
out of town, and date night walks with her husband. As a renter, 
she cares a lot about tenants’ rights. A huge percentage of our city 
is rent-burdened, which is a travesty in a place with incredible 
resources. The third largest number of homeless in Santa Clara 
County comes from Palo Alto. She hopes Council will collaborate to 
address this issue. 
5. Aram James congratulated Council Member Burt on his tenure as 
Mayor for his extraordinary job. He thanked the outgoing council 
members and a special thanks to Council Member DuBois who he 
spoke to about the Safe Parking Program. He wrote a note to Vice 
Mayor Kou, which he read. He is in favor of Vice Mayor Kou for 
Mayor and looks forward to supporting her in that role in 2023. She 
has worked hard and tirelessly for Palo Alto residents. He welcomed 
the new council members. He thanked everybody who came out 
tonight to support our City Council in these critical times. 
6. Erwin Morton is delighted to support Vice Mayor Kou for Mayor and 
he looks forward to working with her in the future. When he 
brought topics to her attention, she provided her support on issues 
such as teen vaping and the recent sandbagging in his 
neighborhood. He thanked the outgoing council members and 
welcomed the incoming council members. 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
NOMINATION: Council Members Stone and Tanaka nominated Council 
Member Kou for Mayor for 2023. 
NOMINATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER KOU AS MAYOR FOR 2023 
PASSED: 7-0 
2. Nomination of Vice Mayor 
Mayor Kou acknowledged the following dignitaries present: County 
Supervisor Joe Simitian, Los Altos Council Member Lynette Lee Eng, from 
Cupertino Council Member Kitty Moore, former Cupertino Mayor Steven 
Scharf, former Palo Alto Mayor Larry Klein, former Palo Alto Mayor Karen 
Holman, former Palo Alto Mayor Liz Kniss, former East Palo Alto Mayor Larry 
Moody, Sunnyvale Council Member Russ Melton, Mountain View Council 
Member Margaret Abe-Koga, former Palo Alto Mayor Yoriko Kishimoto, 
Megan Swezey Fogarty from Stanford, Cupertino Council Member Liang Chao 
and Mountain View Mayor Lucas Ramirez. 
Council Member Veenker nominated Council Member Stone for Vice Mayor. 
Council Member Stone is an experienced City leader, having served as Chair 
of the Policy and Services Committee, Chair of the Palo Alto Human 
Relations Commission and Vice Chair of the Santa Clara County Human 
Rights Commission. Council Member Stone’s public service has included 
promoting diversity, equity and inclusion. He is the only apartment dweller 
on Council in a city where approximately 43% are renters. He has been a 
leading voice on affordable housing and worked with our State Legislators to 
procure more funding in future State budgets. He was not afraid to be the 
sole dissenting voice on police radio encryption. After losing that vote and 
convinced that encryption was a violation of transparency and counter to our 
City’s policy goals, he continued the fight, working with Senator Becker’s 
office to receive clarification from the State Department of Justice. His 
initiative and commitment to the integrity of our policing and criminal justice 
practices are admirable. His commitment to reducing faction, compatibility 
with Mayor Kou, bringing a younger viewpoint and that of a renter into 
leadership, having the strength to vote his conscience but also being 
judicious about when to join with colleagues are some of the reasons she will 
be casting her vote for Council Member Stone for Vice Mayor. 
Council Member Lauing nominated Council Member Stone for Vice Mayor. He 
is experienced in City and County government. He is extremely well 
prepared and a very active participant on all the issues. He takes a proactive 
approach, digging into things with Staff and colleagues in Council meetings. 
He is insightful and sometimes persistent in his questions. He is efficient in 
his comments, which is appreciated. He is highly respectful in all his 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
interactions with council members, staff and commissioners. He truly wants 
to hear multiple points of view. That approach and reputation are invaluable 
for helping our Mayor lead the Council and getting things done. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims nominated Council Member Tanaka for Vice 
Mayor for six reasons. First, his extraordinary length of experience. Council 
Member Tanaka began his seventh year on City Council. He has served and 
chaired on the Finance Committee and Planning and Transportation 
Committee. He was President of the College Terrace Residents Association. 
Second, he was the voters’ choice. In 2016, he came in second behind 
Mayor Liz Kniss. In 2020, he came in third behind Mayor Burt and Mayor 
Kou. Third reason is his deep passion for Palo Alto residents. He listens to 
constituents. He holds office hours weekly and puts them on YouTube. 
Fourth reason is his manner of being at Council meetings. He does his 
homework. He has smart and often brilliant analysis. He dives into the issues 
and helps us understand it by using charts and graphs. He is efficient and 
dedicated. Fifth, he is Asian American in a city that is becoming majority 
Asian American. Sixth, he is entering his final two years on our City Council. 
This is our last chance to elect him as Vice Mayor if he is to become Mayor. 
The pertinent question is not why Council Member Tanaka for Vice Mayor but 
why not. 
Council Member Stone thanked Council Members Veenker and Lauing for 
their nomination. He stated it is humbling and a privilege to be nominated. He 
reflected on how fortunate he was to be here. His parents instilled in him an 
importance of public service and giving back. He has been serving this 
community since he was 23 years old, about 10 years of service at the City 
and County levels. He has had the privilege of chairing various commissions. 
Being a renter, he understands the struggles that about 47% of this 
community experience monthly, at times the uncertainty if you are able to 
afford the rent. During his two years on Council, he has worked hard to build 
strong relationships and push forward critical policies on rent protection and 
affordable housing. He thanked those who continue to serve on the dais, 
former council members who were leaving, as well as those who were his 
mentors helping him through this process. He feels well prepared to step 
into the role of Vice Mayor. He gladly accepts the nomination and hopes to 
serve as Vice Mayor. 
Council Member Tanaka thanked Council Member Lythcott-Haims for her 
nomination. Three generations of his family went into camps during World 
War II. His grandfather died in the camps. He grew up incredibly poor. He is 
in his seventh year on Council. He feels honored to be nominated and 
believes he has the experience, skills and trust of the community for the role 
Vice Mayor. He has a 16-year history of service to this community. He 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
served in many leadership roles, including four terms as President of the 
College Terrace Residents Association and six years on the Planning and 
Transportation Commission including as Chair. He previously served on the 
Blue Ribbon Commission. He developed skills to run efficient meetings and 
ensure all perspectives were heard through his years of experience as CEO 
of a venture-backed company. It is important to structure agendas to allow 
for Council deliberations and public comment at reasonable times because 
he believes it is inappropriate to be here at midnight for important items. 
The dominant demographic in Palo Alto is working parents with school-aged 
kids, which he is the only council member to bring this perspective. He is 
deeply committed to represent the needs and concerns of all members of 
our community, which is why he has held open office hours weekly since 
being elected to Council. In his initial election and reelection, he received 
more votes than other nominees, which reflects the community’s trust and 
support. He looks forward to working with Council in making Palo Alto a 
better place to live, work and raise a family. 
Council Member Burt echoed the comments of Council Members Veenker and 
Lauing. He enthusiastically supports Council Member Stone for Vice Mayor. 
He has an understanding and compassion for social justice and economic 
equality. Nearly half of our community is renters, who represent careers that 
are vital to a sound and diverse community. Council Member Stone is 
committed to local government because of the good it can do to serve our 
community and to make it a fair and more just place to live. He is a clear 
thinker with high integrity. He has progressive values aligned with our 
community. He communicates clearly and well. He listens to the public and 
his colleagues. He works to build consensus, which is how the Council makes 
its decisions and moves things forward. He has been a strong supporter of 
our actions on climate protection because of its criticality for future 
generations. He has been a champion of the youth of our community. 
Mayor Kou opined that Council Member Stone has maturity beyond his years 
and is ready for Vice Mayor leadership. He has become a valuable member 
of Council as he thoroughly reviews Staff reports, has helpful questions and 
comments. He has an acute understanding of social justice. He fought hard 
to end police radio encryption for transparency and accountability, for 
expanding the scope of police auditor oversight and supported a series of 
police reforms. He is cognizant of our community health necessitating social 
service workers to work together with our police officers on calls. With a law 
background, he is technical and able to delve into intricate matters, keeping 
in mind to hear and act on behalf of residents and stakeholders. As a 
teacher, he provides valuable insight on the struggle and needs of youth. He 
champions 
renter 
protection, 
genuine 
affordable 
housing, 
historical 
preservation, and advocacy to protect women’s rights, natural environment, 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
quiet skies for residents and much more. He has chaired committees as a 
commissioner in Palo Alto and at the County. 
Public Comment #2 Vice Mayor Nomination 
1. Jill O’Nan served three terms from 2010 to 2019 on the Palo Alto 
Human Relations Commission (HRC). Council Member Stone joined the 
HRC as a young law student. The Commission invested time in 
mentoring him, advising him and showing him the ropes of how the 
City works. That investment has paid dividends beyond anything they 
could ever have imagined. He has matured and evolved into a true 
leader for our City and County. He is a consensus builder. He is firm in 
his convictions but open to compromise and collaboration with anyone 
who is interested in crafting a pragmatic solution to the City’s 
problems. His legal training has given him an acuity of mind and 
insight that will help us negotiate difficult regulations with the State, 
problems with Stanford and other legal issues that come before us. He 
is in the vanguard of the next generation of young leadership and it is 
time to hand the reins over to these younger leaders. 
2. Winter Dellenbach is enthusiastic about Council Member Stone being 
Vice Mayor. He served on the County Justice Committee. His 
interesting combination of governance and compassion is very much a 
value-add for City Council and Palo Alto. He grasps the nuance of 
issues and gets the big picture, which is very important. He supported 
the Safe Parking Program for RV dwellers. He has been a primary 
supporter of the City’s new 88-unit transitional housing development. 
He has been a consistent and strong voice for increasing rental 
housing protections. He has supported sensible police reform and more 
accountability. 
3. Nicole Chiu-Wang looks forward to working with Council in her roles as 
a community activist and on the boards of multiple Palo Alto 
nonprofits. She strongly endorses Council Member Tanaka for Vice 
Mayor. She believes that representation matters as well as experience. 
He is a leader in the Asian American community. He organized the Palo 
Alto Stop Asian Hate Rally and supported nearly 20 other Bay Area 
rallies. As the only council member representing working parents with 
school-aged children, he brings that valuable perspective to the table. 
If we want working families to feel welcome, they should see 
themselves in our leadership. He has a wealth of experience in public 
service, including Chair of the Planning and Transportation 
Commission, President of the College Terrace Residents Association, 
and understanding of the budget as Chair of the Finance Committee. 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
He has demonstrated a desire to hear all perspectives and act as a 
bridge builder. He holds weekly virtual open office hours. He reaches 
out to inform the community and solicit feedback through social 
media. This should be the norm for City Council because it is important 
to listen to the community. One way the community voices their 
support is through their votes. He has received more votes than any 
other potential nominee in his initial election and reelection. This is his 
penultimate year on Council and he should have the opportunity to 
serve as Vice Mayor. 
4. Jennifer DiBrienza congratulated Mayor Kou and the new council 
members. She thanked the outgoing council members for their work. 
She has worked closely with Council Member Tanaka over the six 
years they served together in public office. He is an independent 
thinker. His knowledge of the budget is very impressive. This is the 
last chance to nominate him as Vice Mayor. Before casting your votes, 
she hoped the Council gives thought to not letting this opportunity go 
by, that the second highest vote-getter will never have a chance to be 
Mayor. 
5. Fred Balin met Council Member Stone six years ago when he was 
running for City Council. In their extended conversation, he was 
gracious, knowledgeable, articulate and listened with sincere interest. 
Council Member Stone is a PAUSD product, was raised in Palo Alto and 
knows his town intimately. He served on the City’s Human Relations 
Commission, educating the public and advising the Council on housing, 
homelessness, domestic violence, policing, implicit bias and much 
more. He was appointed to a similar post at the County level and then 
to its Human Rights Commission where members could educate and 
advocate to the Supervisors. In 2020, he ran and was elected to 
Council. His character, courtesy, collaboration, collegiality, preparation 
and clarity have been evident for all Council watchers to appreciate but 
just as important is his willingness to question when needed and not 
just go along when something is not right. In his 2020 campaign, he 
spoke in opposition to the unanimous City Council vote limiting the 
scope of the independent police auditor. As a member of the City 
Council, he was the only one to object to the encryption of police radio 
transmissions. Both policies have been overturned during his time on 
Council. In the role of Vice Mayor, he will be an outstanding support 
and, if needed, fill in for Mayor Kou. 
6. Karen Holman congratulated Mayor Kou. She expressed appreciation 
for outgoing council members and especially former Council Member 
DuBois’ keen sense of humor. Former Mayor Burt’s dedication and 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
action last year was appreciated. She agrees with the nomination of 
Council Member Stone for Vice Mayor, whom she has known since he 
first applied for the HRC when he was 23. He is a man of high integrity 
and a keen sense of fairness. His dedication to service starting at such 
an early age is exemplary. His intelligent analysis of issues 
demonstrates his legal mind at work. His colleague memos, leadership 
positions, and stance on police decryption speak highly of his maturity, 
intelligence and willingness to step out there even if he is by himself. 
7. Jennifer L has been a Palo Alto resident for 23 years. She strongly 
supports Council Member Tanaka for Vice Mayor. Five years ago, she 
had some issues with the City. She reached out to a few council 
members and he was the first to respond. They had a long meeting to 
discuss the issues in depth and he listened attentively. He is very 
passionate about his job as council member and he deeply cares about 
residents. He puts high priority to issues that concern most Palo Alto 
residents, such as crime rate, housing and the budget. He has a 
wealth of experience in public service. He is a great leader as Chair of 
the Finance Committee. He has played a role in the Planning and 
Transportation Commission and as President of the College Terrace 
Residents Association. He is a very successful entrepreneur and his 
entrepreneurial spirit is needed in Palo Alto. 
8. Aram James commented that Council Member Tanaka rode his bicycle 
last night in the dark to talk with him. Council Member Stone has 
another opportunity but Council Member Tanaka does not. Council 
Member Tanaka spent 16 years serving the city. He was the voters’ 
choice. He is an environmentalist. He is accountable, accessible and 
accomplished. He has held Sunday meetings regarding Tasers, police 
canines and the hiring of the police chief. He is a quiet but fierce man, 
an extraordinary human being and should be our Vice Mayor. Mr. 
James requested Council Member Stone to let Council Member Tanaka 
be Vice Mayor and next year Council Member Stone can be Vice Mayor. 
9. Paul Fong congratulated Mayor Kou. Mr. Fong lives in Sunnyvale, is a 
labor leader, Asian American community leader in Santa Clara County, 
an elected Trustee and former President of the Executive Board of the 
South Bay Labor Council, and former Assembly Member to the 22nd 
and 28th Assembly Districts. The 22nd Assembly District ends in 
Mountain View and neighboring Palo Alto has many similar issues. Mr. 
Fong served the City of Palo Alto as a trustee to the Foothill-De Anza 
Community College District. Mr. Fong is co-founder of the Asian Pacific 
American Leader Institute (APALI) and many other social justice Asian 
American Pacific Islander organizations. The Asian American Pacific 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
Islander community is looking for leadership to address the issues of 
Asian hate and crimes against Asian Americans. Council Member 
Tanaka and Mayor Kou provided that leadership in the Palo Alto City 
Council as well as 20 other cities. As Vice Mayor, Council Member 
Tanaka would expand his leadership of Asian hate issues with a larger 
platform. 
10. 
Randy Popp is a Palo Alto resident. He thanked the outgoing 
council members for their time and commitment. He greatly 
appreciated their willingness to lead and represent our community. He 
looks forward to the coming year with renewed hope based on the 
appointment of the new council members. He enthusiastically 
supported Council Member Tanaka for Vice Mayor. Council Member 
Tanaka has a history of capably understanding nuanced issues, 
advocating for logical and thoughtful solutions and outcomes, and 
provides an exceptional example to others through his outreach and 
willingness to interact. Mr. Popp believes Council Member Tanaka will 
be an exceptional Vice Mayor based on observations of his 
participation on City Council and the Planning and Transportation 
Commission. He will bring the care and skill developed over his many 
years of public service to his role as Vice Mayor. 
NOMINATION: Council Members Veenker and Lauing nominated Council 
Member Stone for Vice Mayor for 2023. 
NOMINATION: Council Member Lythcott-Haims nominated Council Member 
Tanaka for Vice Mayor for 2023.  
First Round of voting for the position of Vice Mayor with term ending 
December 31, 2023.  
Voting For: 
Greer Stone  
Greg Tanaka  
Kou, Stone, Burt, Lauing, Veenker 
Tanaka, Lythcott-Haims 
NOMINATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER STONE AS VICE MAYOR FOR 
2023 PASSED: 5-2 
3. Resolution Expressing Appreciation for Outstanding Public Service to 
Alison Cormack as Council Member 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims read the resolution. 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
Council Member Cormack stated she hopes this Council is able to build trust 
that can sustain them through whatever tough times are coming. When in 
doubt, she wants the Council to remember they are leaders, not 
micromanagers. She hopes all council members will take a few minutes each 
week to prepare themselves for the texts that come with tragic news, the 
angry emails and the disrespectful comments that are part of the job. She 
also hopes they will take some time to celebrate and treasure the good 
news, grateful emails and thoughtful comments when they come. She is 
grateful for the people who served before her, the people who encouraged 
her to run, the people who worked on her campaign, the people who elected 
her, the people who served with her, her family, and the people who do the 
work of our City all day, all night and all year, our talented and dedicated 
staff. 
Council Member Tanaka will miss Ms. Cormack. It was admirable that she 
was prepared, read everything in the packet and knew the page numbers to 
locate items. He was impressed with her memory and dedication. She is 
incredibly smart. The City is going to lose a great asset. It was a privilege 
serving with her. 
Vice Mayor Stone will deeply miss Ms. Cormack. He congratulated her on 
four wonderful years. 
Mayor Kou thanked Ms. Cormack for serving the last four years. She was 
amazed by her thoughtfulness to staff and for visiting them with fresh-baked 
cookies. 
Council Member Veenker was impressed by Ms. Cormack’s advocacy on 
many issues, including housing and climate. Council Member Veenker 
thanked Ms. Cormack for her preparation and persistence, for speaking her 
mind and giving her all, for supporting and mentoring women. The advice 
given during the campaign was appreciated. 
Council Member Burt thanked Ms. Cormack for her service on the Council 
and to the community through the wonderful library bond and the 
community benefits we all derive from it. She is a model on dedication to the 
office, the degree to which she immersed herself on all the issues and the 
hundreds of pages of Council packets every meeting. She took great pride in 
modeling decorum. The commitment she made on the Sustainability and 
Climate Action Plan over the last two years is an enduring contribution made 
to the City. 
Public Comment #3 Council Member Cormack 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
1. Cari Templeton is a Palo Alto resident and serves on the Planning 
Commission. Ms. Cormack mentored her. Ms. Templeton is 
speaking on behalf of Senator Becker and Assembly Member 
Berman, who provided a resolution. The closing part of the 
resolution reads: As a result of her tireless work and unwavering 
commitment, Alison Cormack has compiled an impressive record of 
personal and civic achievements, a record that has earned her the 
admiration and respect of those persons who have had the privilege 
of associating with her. Congratulations on a term well served. 
2. Jennifer Landesman thanked former Mayor Burt for his leadership 
this year. She congratulated the new council members. She 
thanked former Council Members Filseth, DuBois and Cormack. As 
an activist, Ms. Landesman gave a special thanks to Ms. Cormack 
for making outreach positive. Ms. Cormack’s office hours at the café 
were seamless. During meetings, Ms. Cormack would pause and 
say, “For the public listening in, I am on this page.” Ms. Landesman 
put in a lot of effort to write emails and it was nice for her to hear 
that Ms. Cormack read them. Ms. Cormack will be missed. 
3. Aram James wished Ms. Cormack well in her future endeavors. He 
commended her for the extraordinary work she did as a criminal 
defense lawyer. He was extraordinarily impressed by her attention 
to detail. 
4. Mountain View Mayor Lucas Ramirez congratulated Mayor Kou, Vice 
Mayor Stone and the new council members. He spoke in 
appreciation of Ms. Cormack’s work, for stepping up to serve her 
community, for serving in a very difficult time and for being a good 
friend. 
MOTION: Council Member Burt, seconded by Mayor Kou to adopt the 
resolution recognizing Council Member Cormack for her outstanding public 
service as Council Member.   
MOTION PASSES: 7-0 
4. Resolution Expressing Appreciation for Outstanding Public Service to Tom 
DuBois as Council Member 
Vice Mayor Stone read the resolution. All outgoing council members were 
provided a thank you plaque as well as a commendation from Supervisor 
Simitian’s office. 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
Mr. Dubois expressed his gratitude. He stated it was an honor and privilege 
to work for the citizens of Palo Alto for the last eight years. He thanked the 
voters for entrusting him with the responsibility in representing their 
interests, which was very fulfilling. He looks back on his time on Council with 
pride and appreciation for the opportunity to serve. He extended a heartfelt 
thank you to his fellow council members. He valued the respectful and 
collaborative working relationship they shared. He thanked Staff for their 
hard work. He congratulated the newly elected council members and wished 
them the best during their term. He hopes they all take seriously the threat 
to City’s local agency powers under the California Constitution. The State 
government cannot know what is happening in every town and city, which is 
why it is so important we protect that power regardless of the issue. He will 
continue to be a dedicated and active member of the community. 
Council Member Tanaka thanked Mr. Dubois for his service. 
Council Member Burt commented it was a pleasure working with Mr. DuBois, 
seeing his growth and greater understanding of the community and 
commitment throughout his eight years of service. Of note was Mr. DuBois’ 
leadership on renter protections, infrastructure investments, affordable 
housing, water recycling, climate action plan and his broad commitment to 
the residents of our community. Council Member Burt will miss Mr. DuBois’ 
dry humor. 
Council Member Veenker thanked Mr. DuBois for his service, vision, 
knowledge, practicality and big-picture approach to governing. Council 
Member Veenker stated it was a pleasure to work with Mr. DuBois on 
conceiving and launching the Sibling Cities partnership with Bloomington, 
Indiana. 
Vice Mayor Stone said he would miss Mr. DuBois. It was a pleasure to sit 
alongside him the past two years and he had been a wonderful mentor. 
Mayor Kou remarked that Mr. DuBois’ actions showed his love for Palo Alto. 
He championed fairness, openness, transparency and respect. He has a 
long-vision focus on what is good for Palo Alto for the next 10, 20, 30 years. 
He was troubled with the innovative startups competing with big companies 
and not being able to find space, so he supported a petition initiative by 
residents to limit the development of office space. This also allowed us to 
focus on addressing our office-housing imbalance. He was troubled that 
renters were being pushed out due to disappearing affordable housing 
options and he coauthored a colleague’s memo with recommendations to 
explore areas that had not been addressed to produce affordability with the 
extremely low, very low, and low-income limits. He coauthored a colleague’s 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
memo to strengthen renter protection for Palo Alto residents. He was 
troubled about the growing number of people living in vehicles and he 
coauthored a colleague’s memo stating the City of Palo Alto must address 
this matter from a health and safety standpoint. He coauthored a colleague’s 
memo on the impacts of short-term rentals. He was interested in recycling 
water and negotiated with Valley Water in order to do so. In 2014 during his 
campaign, he addressed fiber to the home and we now have an 
implementation plan. He is an ultimate thinker, strategist, and action-
oriented representative. Mayor Kou will miss Mr. DuBois on Council and she 
thanked him for his service. 
Public Comment #5 Council Member DuBois 
1. Alex Kobayashi spoke on behalf of Senator Josh Becker and 
Assembly Member Marc Berman to thank Mr. DuBois from the State 
of California and congratulate him on his past eight years of 
service. Most notable was his service as Mayor during incredibly 
trying times, starting with the State of the City done online and 
ending with helping the City transition to reopening. The City would 
not have been able to do that as smoothly without his 
thoughtfulness and leadership. 
2. Winter Dellenbach enjoyed Mr. DuBois’ sense of humor. His 
leadership made all the difference in November 2021 when Council 
agreed to a package of 15 equity police policy and accountability 
reforms in one meeting, which was a landmark occasion and 
fulfilled the commitment the City made in June 2021. Without Mr. 
DuBois, that promise would not have been fulfilled and he can feel 
good about that forever. He was determined that Staff’s work, 
which started in 2018, to update our tree ordinance would be 
completed while he was on Council and it was. He led the Council 
through the choppy waters of policymaking and did it with finesse 
and unruffled feathers. 
3. Terry Holzemer congratulated the new council members, Mayor and 
Vice Mayor and wished them the best. Mr. DuBois served as Mayor 
during COVID. Thanks to his guidance and leadership, we were able 
to push forward through one of the most difficult times in our 
country. Mr. DuBois was thanked for the Public Safety building as 
well as his great work on the restoration efforts on the Roth 
Building, which was an important project for the future of Palo Alto 
because it will tell the history of our city to future generations. Mr. 
Filseth was thanked for being the Chair of the Finance Committee, 
always watching out for our City finances, particularly our pension 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
funds. Limiting non-residential development was important for our 
City’s future. Mr. DuBois and Mr. Filseth are very humble. Mr. 
Holzemer wished all of our leaders were as polite, trustworthy, kind 
and gentle. 
4. Aram James commented that Mr. DuBois was a very down to earth 
man and was the first person to say hi whenever they were out in 
the streets. 
5. Mora thanked Mr. DuBois for his years of service on the City Council 
and particularly for his hard work as Mayor during 2021. Mr. DuBois 
brought his positive attitude and organized a number of community 
events in a way that was safe and welcoming to bring Palo Alto 
residents together during that tough year. He has been a 
remarkable advocate for youth and supported important programs 
for their mental health and wellness. Mora thanked Mr. DuBois for 
his mentorship and leadership. 
 
MOTION: Council Member Lauing, seconded by Council Member Burt to 
adopt the resolution recognizing Council Member DuBois for his outstanding 
public service as Council Member.   
MOTION PASSES: 7-0 
 
5. Resolution Expressing Appreciation for Outstanding Public Service to Eric 
Filseth as Council Member 
Council Member Cormack read the resolution. 
Council Member Filseth thanked current and former Council colleagues and 
will miss working with them. He is grateful for the work they did together. 
He thanked all the people who supported him as a candidate and in his job 
as an elected official. He thanked our City Staff who work hard every day 
and many nights on behalf of our community. He thanked his wife and sons 
for their patience, support and tolerance. He thanked everybody present in 
person and virtually. He especially thanked all who contribute their time in 
service to our community. 
Council Member Veenker thanked Mr. Filseth for his attention to the non-
glamorous things. 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
Council Member Burt echoed the value Mr. Filseth brought toward assuring 
us to focus on our fiscal sustainability because all the services we provide to 
the community are dependent on our finances.  
Council Member Tanaka appreciated Mr. Filseth’s focus and work on the 
pension. Council Member Tanaka thanked Mr. Filseth for his service and 
loved his analysis. 
Vice Mayor Stone will miss Mr. Filseth, his wonkiness, ability to analyze and 
dig deep into detail. Mr. Filseth was not afraid to use charts and graphs. Vice 
Mayor Stone stated it was a great privilege serving with Mr. Filseth. 
Mayor Kou will miss the interactive Excel spreadsheets and graphs, which 
were very valuable and appreciated. Mr. Filseth colleague’s memo regarding 
funding for affordable housing and examining the City’s impact fees was 
helpful. Mayor Kou thanked Mr. Filseth for his service. 
Public Comment #4 Council Member Filseth 
1. Alex Kobayashi spoke on behalf of Senator Becker and Assembly 
Member Berman. Mr. Kobayashi thanked Mr. Filseth for being the 
best advocate for the residents of Palo Alto over the past eight 
years. 
2. Winter Dellenbach thanked Mr. Filseth for his use of flip charts that 
make things easy to understand and did not waste her time. Mr. 
Filseth was thanked for the business tax and for his service. 
 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Stone, seconded by Council Member Lauing to adopt 
the resolution recognizing Council Member Filseth for his outstanding public 
service as Council Member. 
MOTION PASSES: 7-0 
 
6. Resolution Expressing Appreciation for Outstanding Public Service to Pat 
Burt as 2022 Mayor  
Vice Mayor Stone read the resolution. 
Council Member Burt remarked that Council had a great path of 
accomplishments last year and is looking forward to the year ahead. They 
restored the disruptions from COVID, got back on sounder financial footing 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
going forward and had accomplishments in housing and climate change. He 
thanked his former and current colleagues. 
Vice Mayor Stone thanked former Mayor Burt for his incredible service and 
ongoing mentorship, which he greatly appreciated. 
Mayor Kou commented it had been a pleasure working with former Mayor 
Burt as Vice Mayor last year. She thanked him for his guidance while 
working alongside him, which was invaluable. 
Public Comment #6 Mayor Burt  
1. Winter Dellenbach thought former Mayor Burt did a good job and 
was a living public benefit. 
2. Mora Oommen congratulated Mayor Kou and Vice Mayor Stone. She 
thanked the outgoing council members for their service and 
welcomed the new council members. Ms. Oommen is eExecutive 
Director of Youth Community Service (YCS) and spoke on behalf of 
the organization to express their deep gratitude and appreciation to 
former Mayor Burt. He has consistently shown up for our youth to 
help guide and engage them in a diverse number of issues, 
including climate change, the art of civic engagement and youth 
mental health and wellness. They are thankful for his support of 
various community events, including the Dr. Martin Luther King 
Junior Day of Service and she hopes many will come to that event 
as well as the National Day of Service in September. She thanked 
him for his guidance and mentorship. 
3. Katie Reuff thanked former Mayor Burt for everything he has done 
to help their Student Coalition be what it is today. He has been 
relentlessly supportive. He helped mentor many of these 
individuals. Through his actions, he has demonstrated how they can 
be leaders in our municipality through different events. 
 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Stone, seconded by Council Member Veenker to adopt 
the resolution recognizing Council Member Burt for his outstanding public 
service as Mayor in 2022. 
MOTION PASSES: 7-0 
 
AA1. Discussion of the City’s Response to Recent Storms 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
City Manager Ed Shikada presented slides. He recognized the role of the 
community. Staff immediately activated our Emergency Operation Center, 
which has continued through today. Staff established coordination with the 
San Francisquito Creek Agencies, including our Multi-Agency Coordination 
Group, with support from the National Weather Service, Valley Water, the 
Cities of Menlo Park and East Palo Alto, Counties of San Mateo and Santa 
Clara as well as the Joint Power Authority. Staff monitored and responded to 
issues throughout Palo Alto but the most significant flooding issues related to 
San Francisquito Creek. There were 50 tree-related emergency calls 
responded to over the last several days, eight of which included power line 
impacts and removal of roughly 150 tons of wood and tree debris throughout 
the city. CityofPaloAlto.org/FloodAlert will have daily updates, informational 
flyers, important phone numbers to report issues, online monitoring of creek 
levels, videos on flood stages, and answers to questions about flood risk as 
well as links for storm forecasts, power outages and other resources. 
Council Member Burt noted that the Reach 1 projects significantly reduced 
flooding potential as a result of downstream measures. Reach 2 needs to be 
completed to give us full protection. He thanked the Staff for their hard work 
over the last week and a half. 
Public Comment #AA1 Storm Update 
1. Leland Francois is from East Palo Alto and is a volunteer in South 
San Mateo County. He is a ham radio operator, KI6AWN. The 
University Avenue Bridge at San Francisquito Creek was put 
together in 1925. He asked why dredging has not taken place 
further upstream if everything was financed downstream below 
101. If overgrowth was removed, he does not believe there would 
be any flooding despite what happened downstream at 101. He 
thinks Palo Alto, Menlo Park and East Palo Alto along with the Joint 
Power Authority should have agreed to take preventative measures 
to get rid of the overgrowth and wanted to know why that has not 
happened. 
2. Hamilton thanked the three outgoing council members for their 
service. He congratulated the newly elected council members, 
Mayor and Vice Mayor. He thanked Staff and Council for their 
efforts on flood mitigation and storm response. The construction of 
Newell Bridge was originally scheduled to begin in 2021 and is a 
prerequisite for replacing the Pope-Chaucer Bridge. The 
replacement of the two bridges along with channel improvements 
can reduce the probability of flooding by threefold. Because Newell 
Bridge and Pope-Chaucer Bridge have concrete abutments that 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
extend into the creek, they artificially reduce the creek’s natural 
flow and significantly increase the probability of flooding. The 
replacement bridges will restore the creek’s natural flow and 
significantly increase capacity. Joint research by the City of San 
Francisco and Berkeley Lab found the effect of climate change on 
future storms would be significant, leading to storms that are more 
powerful. Next winter’s El Niño, as in 1998, will be strong according 
to the former lead meteorologist of the National Weather Service. 
Caltrans designated Newell Bridge as functionally obsolete. It is a 
substandard, narrow bridge with no traffic lights, sidewalk or bike 
path. A new bridge will provide safe sidewalk for pedestrians, safe 
bike paths and improve car safety. Mr. Hamilton believes the City 
should expedite permitting, put the construction project out for bid 
and start construction this year. The City can fund any shortfall by 
raising external funding. Measure K was passed with one of the 
goals to improve public safety. If the project is delayed to raise 
more funds, construction costs will go up higher. He encouraged 
City Council to make climate adaptation and mitigation with the 
Newell Project Bridge action items and priorities in 2023. 
3. Jennifer Landesman was thankful for the City’s response and their 
work around the clock to address emergency issues. She was a 
benefactor of the Reach 1 project because her block was a river 
during the 1998 flood but was not flooded with the recent storms. 
She suggested periodic updates on the work to complete the new 
bridge and to consider updates on City projects that affect property, 
health and safety. The February 9, 2021 City Auditor’s Report built 
a detailed risk assessment grid and building of the bridge is listed 
as Risk ID #15. An auditor’s perspective is suitable for identifying 
future audit areas but what is missing is a practice in policy to 
document and publish annual or quarterly executive status and 
explanatory reports on a project’s timeline, milestones, obstacles or 
next steps. This can help affected neighbors stay informed and 
support the City and current and future Councils to move things 
forward on issues that are hazards. She requested a meeting be 
scheduled this year regarding building the bridge. 
4. Cari Templeton sits on the Planning and Transportation Commission 
but is speaking on her own capacity and not representing the 
Commission in her comments. She appreciated Mr. Shikada’s 
presentation that included the photos of dangers and hazards on El 
Camino Real. El Camino Real has been deteriorating faster with the 
heavy rains. Potholes are very dangerous. It is dangerous for 
bicyclists to ride across nine lanes (two parking lanes, three lanes in 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
each direction and a center lane). Caltrans will repave part of El 
Camino Real in the near future. Mountain View has a plan for how 
they are going to repave it and improve bike, pedestrian, and 
flooding safety. She encouraged Council to come up with a plan and 
direct Staff to work on improving safety and implement that plan 
when it is repaved. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims expressed gratitude to Staff for stepping up 
to serve our City. The public was asking questions on Palo Alto Online, 
Nextdoor and across other social media channels. The City does not have 
staff present in those online forums. She would be delighted to have more 
funding for staff to spend their time online responding to misinformation, 
panic and worry in addition to pushing out information through the website 
and emails. 
 
Public Comment  
1. Bob Moss congratulated Mayor Kou and Vice Mayor Stone. He 
welcomed new Council Members Veenker, Lauing and Lythcott-
Haims. He thought it was unfortunate to have two very qualified 
council members termed out because of term limits. It takes time 
for somebody serving on City Council to understand the issues and 
the community as well as how to work effectively. He believes term 
limits should be extended or eliminated. 
2. Erwin Morton thanked the current and outgoing council members. 
He congratulated the new Mayor and Vice Mayor. He spoke on 
behalf of the Palo Alto PTA Council to extend an invitation. The PTA 
Council has been working for several years on the epidemic of teen 
vaping. Three years ago in conjunction with Palo Alto Medical 
Foundation, they held a leaders’ breakfast to inform community 
leaders about this problem. It is time for another leaders’ breakfast 
to provide an update on the progress made and the challenges 
remaining. The event will be Thursday, January 26, 8:30 to 11:00 
a.m., at the Mitchell Park Community Center. He thanked the City 
of Palo Alto and the County Board of Supervisors for supporting this 
event. He hopes many of the council members are able to attend. 
Speakers include Gordon Sloss, Chief of the Tobacco Control Branch 
of the California Department of Public Health; former Senator Jerry 
Hill, who authored the bill the voters confirmed through Prop 31; 
County Supervisor Joe Simitian; experts from Santa Clara County, 
Stanford, and UCLA; as well as several high school students. An 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  1/9/2023 
email will be sent with the details. He thanked Council for adopting 
a strong ordinance in 2020 to make vaping materials less readily 
accessible to our community’s children. This will come back this 
year for further strengthening to bring it into alignment with the 
newly revised County Ordinance. 
 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 9 P.M. 
 
ATTEST:                                             
APPROVED:           
____________________ 
 
 
____________________                                 
City Clerk                                              Mayor 
NOTE: Action minutes are prepared in accordance with Palo Alto Municipal 
Code (PAMC) 2.04.160(a) and (b). Summary minutes (sense) are prepared 
in accordance with PAMC Section 2.04.160(c). Beginning in January 2018, in 
accordance with Ordinance No. 5423, the City Council found action minutes 
and the video/audio recordings of Council proceedings to be the official 
records of both Council and committee proceedings. These recordings are 
available on the City’s website. 
