CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 27
Special Meeting
Monday, February 13, 2023
CALL TO ORDER
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 3:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely:       None
Absent:                          None
SPECIAL ORDERS OF THE DAY
1. 
Recognition of the Palo Alto Library as a Five Star Library
Mayor Kou thanked and congratulated Library Director Gayathri Kanth, Palo Alto Library staff, 
Friends of the Library, and the Teen Library Advisory Board. Library Journal’ s Index of Public
Library Service recently recognized Palo Alto Library as a Five Star Library. The library was one
of only five in California to receive a Five Star rating.  
Library Director Gayathri Kanth recognized the flexibility and effort of Library staff. She thanked
members and the community, the City Manager and City colleagues for bringing services to the
community, and City Council for increasing funding. 
A photo was taken of Library staff and City Council.  
AGENDA CHANGES, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS
City Manager Ed Shikada noted there were no specific changes. He expected the Buena Vista
Mobile Home Park update to start at 7 P.M., but was subject to change. There would be one
presentation covering both study session items because they were so closely related.  
CONSENT CALENDAR
4. 
Approval of Minutes from the January 28, 2023 and January 30, 2023 City Council
Meeting
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
5. 
Adoption of Resolution 10095 Adopting Updated Guidelines for the Submission and
Tabulation of Protests in Connection with Rate Hearings Conducted Pursuant to Article
XIIID, Section 6 of the California Constitution and Repealing and Replacing Resolution
8815; CEQA status—not a project. 
6. 
Approval of a 6-year Contract with Manesco Corporation in an Amount Not-to-Exceed
697,326 to Conduct Annual Walking and Mobile Gas Leak Surveys and Annual
Resurveys of Existing Gas Leaks to Begin March 2023 ($ 633,932) and Authorization of
Contract Contingency ($ 63,393); CEQA status—exempt under CEQA Guidelines sections
15301(c) and 15308.  
7. 
Approval of a Purchase Order with Interstate Truck Center in an Amount Not to Exceed
297,244 for the Purchase of Two 2023 International CV Chipper Body Trucks, Utilizing a
Cooperative Purchase Agreement, Funded by Capital Improvement Program Project VR-
23000
Removed From Consent
PUBLIC COMMENTS
There were no public comments.  
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 6.  
Council Members Veenker, Lythcott-Haims, and Tanaka requested to pull Agenda Item Number
7. 
City Manager Ed Shikada declared that Item 7 would be scheduled for a future Council meeting.  
MOTION: Vice Mayor Stone moved to approve the Consent Calendar, which was seconded by
Council Member Veenker to approve Consent Agenda Items 4, 5, 6
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 4, 5: 7-0
MOTION PASSED ITEM 6: 6-1
Council Member
Tanaka voiced two objections to the six-year contract with Manesco
Corporation – the prior contract amount was not in the Staff Report, and it identified 128
unresolved natural gas leaks. 
CONTINUED ACTION ITEM FROM FEBRUARY 6, 2023
AA1. 
Approval of the 2023 City Council Priority Focus Areas, and Objectives Areas, Objectives, 
and Respective Major Projects for Calendar Year 2023 (Item continued from February 6, 
2023 Meeting) 
City Manager Ed Shikada thanked City Council for their efforts in outlining time-bound exempt
objectives and implored the Council to determine priority focus areas and direction to meet
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
objections. He recognized the tensions between capacity, resource limitations, and potential
additional objectives. 
Assistant to the City Manager Lupita Alamos presented the four priority areas adopted by
Council on January 28, 2023 – economic recovery and transition, climate change and natural
environment, housing for social and economic balance, and community health and safety. She
outlined the overarching objectives within each priority area, pending projects within each
objective, and those requiring allocation of resources. She urged City Council to provide
direction and approval of the objective areas, the projects, and resource allocation. 
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Ken Horowitz asked Council to define the priorities to be completed in 2023, assign Council
members to monitor the one-year priorities, and develop a business plan for each priority. 
Arnout Boelens, Chairperson of Palo Alto PTA’s Safe Routes to School, urged Council to work on
a road safety policy ASAP as part of the community health and safety and climate change
priority areas. He brought 16 letters of support, 450-plus petition signatures, and audience
members in support of a Safe Systems policy with an ambitious timeline for achieving zero
severe road injuries and fatalities. He asked the Council to allocate a $40,000 match to the Safe
Streets for All Grant toward a Safe Systems policy. 
Eric Nordman asked City Council to adopt a Safe Systems approach to transportation, which
was proven to dramatically reduce injuries and deaths of pedestrians, bicyclists and drivers. He
urged Council to expedite updating the Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation Plan (BPTP) ( the
last update was over 11 years ago) to avoid losing grants because of delays. 
Nikita Kutselev supported the road safety policy and presented a petition with more than 300
signatures for protected bike lanes. He quoted the Safe Routes to School document wherein
the Office of Transportation recommended the bike lanes on the busier, high-speed roads with
unprotected lanes not be used. 
Nicole Zoeller Boelens urged the Council to make use of the Safe Streets for All Grant and to
move forward with creating a road safety policy. 
Penny Ellson asked the Council to prioritize the Safe Systems approach in transportation
planning, to work toward developing a Safe System policy recommendation, and to set an
ambitious timeline for pursuing zero severe injuries and roadway fatalities. She urged the
Council to better align the City’s policies to federal and state policies to better be able to
receive grant money and to create comprehensive plans for proposed new housing in South
Palo Alto. 
Angelina Rosh represented the Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition and urged City Council to
increase road safety, thereby improving environmentally friendly modes of transportation, and
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
to become proactive by implementing the Safe Systems policy, which would improve safety for
children and pedestrians and likely increase bicycle use in the city, thereby reducing emissions. 
Shree Sandilya, President of the Gunn Bike Club, urged the Council to implement the Road
Safety policy and to value pedestrian safety. He cited 86 victims and 13 fatalities of severe
crashes between 2010 and 2019. 
Ying Chin Tseng expressed gratitude to the Council for prioritizing health and safety as a 2023
goal. She read a letter her son had written regarding biking to school and traffic dangers.  
Erik Gutfeldt, a 40-year resident of Palo Alto and long-time bicyclist, emphatically supported the
Safe Roads policy, which would improve safety and increase bicycling. 
Anthony Montes represented the Silicon Valley Bicycle Coalition and supported a Safe System
approach in Palo Alto, which would supplement
the City’s current policy, systemically
encourage people to use the policy, and enact proper responses to accidents. 
Mark Shull discussed how SFO air traffic over Palo Alto had grown since 2000 from 70 to over
200 flights per day in a narrowly concentrated path and with frequent arrivals. He requested
City Council forcefully push for a seat at the FAA roundtable and Next Gen Advisory meetings. 
He would send Council a summary indicating why Palo Alto deserved to be on the SFO’s official
roundtable. He supported the comments made regarding bicycle safety policies.  
Keri Wagner, President of the Palo Alto Council of PTAs, supported the Bike and Safety Plan and
urged City Council to prioritize the Safe Streets plan. She stated the plan supported all three
community and health and safety priorities. 
John Kelley echoed the need for clear, one-year priorities and called the Safe Systems approach
vital for the community. He suggested that Council clarify its overall priorities and make climate
goals number one and housing goals number two. He requested Council set a sunset date for
methane in Palo Alto to be December 31, 2026, and to enact it by the end of the second
quarter of 2023. He encouraged the Council to adopt an HCD-approved housing element by July
1, 2023, and an HCD-guided ADU ordinance by March 1, 2023. 
Rebecca Ward discussed air traffic, increased noise, and associated health risks due to FAA Next
Gen and SFO traffic. She asked the Council to treat this as a serious health and safety issue and
to apply the needed resources to remediate it. 
James Stoyell asked the Council to prioritize the Safe Systems approach to road safety and
shared that many people did not feel safe bicycling in Palo Alto. 
Margarita Mendez, a middle school teacher, shared her bicycle-vehicle collision story, which
occurred in the bike lane on California Avenue. She urged City Council to focus on road safety, 
specifically for bicyclists. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Amie Ashton, Board Chair of the Silicon Valley Bicycle Coalition, supported the Safe Systems
policy. 
Liz Gardner believed that safe street planning would increase quality of life, and she described
various other possible benefits. She called attention to cracks and gravel between Sandhill and
Charleston, which made travel stressful. 
Frank Viggiano spoke in favor of the Safe Systems approach, which had been shown to work in
other communities and aligned with Council’ s climate and environmental goals. 
Ken Kershner, co-founder of a transportation vehicle startup company and advocate with the
Silicon Valley Bike Coalition team, encouraged adopting a Safe Streets policy, which would
promote more people bicycling and improve safety. 
Vice Mayor Stone asked staff about revisions to the tree ordinance; if the goal to evaluate
opportunities for new parking facilities in downtown would include prior direction on potential
affordable housing; if staff anticipated bringing back to Council prior to the end of the year a
permanent ordinance or recommendation for car-free streets in regard to Item J; for an
explanation of the timeframe for the rental registry; and if Item P, grid modernization, would
include lobbyists at the state and federal level.  
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston stated staff received concerns from community members
at the time the updated tree ordinance was adopted. Part of Council’ s original motion was to
look at those concerns after a year and potentially have a discussion with PRC and PTC with
appropriate amendments being brought to Council.  
City Manager Shikada confirmed that potential parking facilities were to be considered in
conjunction with affordable housing. He clarified that Item P was specifically focused on local
efforts, so additional interest at the State level was not included. He did not anticipate having
the results of the feasibility analysis related to car-free streets before the year’s end.  
Chief Transportation Official Philip Kamhi noted why they would be requesting an extension of
the temporary street closure related to Item J. 
Planning and Transportation Director Jon Lait shared that the goal was to have something ready
for Council’ s consideration around this time next year related to the rental registry.  
Council Member Lauing sought clarity on the bullet point regarding the treatment of residential
and commercial vacant property of Oakland and San Francisco and what needed to be done to
implement stakeholder engagement and implementation of the new business tax. 
Assistant City Manager Kiely Nose responded that the bullet point related to treatment of
vacant property identified areas of interest for Council. It was up to Council if it was to be
adjusted or amended or if would be a high priority. She discussed the two aspects of
stakeholder engagement and implementation of the new business tax.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Council Member Burt recommended it be listed as such if street design was included in the task
of car-free streets. He requested information regarding the California Avenue streetscape and
suggested announcing that the project would occur this year and that it be described in a way
other than project management. He asked what area the downtown housing plan covered and
recommended being clear about the plan referring to University Avenue and that it was a
grant-funded plan. He did not see that the rezoning process included for Cal Ave.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi confirmed that street design was included in the task of car-
free streets.  
City Manager Shikada voiced there was a project underway that included the development of
streetscape designs. There was not a design contract in place for California Avenue, but there
was a contract for project management and an RFP to do the feasibility study for it being
permanently maintained as car-free. Regarding the downtown housing plan, he clarified that it
did not include Cal Ave, and it was a grant-funded project.  
Director Lait agreed with the City Manager’ s comments related to the downtown housing plan. 
He explained why the rezoning process for Cal Ave was not included on the current list. He
could obtain the schedule, but it was not scheduled in the next year.  
Council Member Veenker asked about the status and budget for the climate change protection
of Items T, U, and V and for more information on the housing production policies. She
supported process improvements, but she wanted to know what was being envisioned in
broadening the allowable ADUs. 
Director Eggleston described the three studies that needed to be done during the S/ CAP work
in regard to climate change. He hoped two of the plans would be accepted by Council by the
end of the year with the third being a preliminary draft. As for funding, the early round
estimate was close to $1M. RFPs were being developed to hopefully get studies underway. He
elaborated on the strategic plans for EVs, reliability and resiliency, and the electrical grid. He
explained the study on resource needs and project opportunities.   
Director Lait commented there would be an ordinance coming to City Council that would
advance some recommendations from the PT& C to the existing ADU ordinance and would
incorporate direction received from HCD. It would not include taller ADU heights throughout
the city. If that was an interest of the Council, he would need additional direction. They were
scheduled to return to the Council within the second quarter with the changes.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims expressed a desire to combine 2022 progress with plans for
2023. She commented on the lack of references in the Housing Element to San Antonio, El
Camino Real, and the Research Park area. She sought clarification on new components of the
Housing Element that Council did not fully deliberate, which were MM, NN, and OO.  
Director Lait explained that a specific recommendation regarding to the Housing Element was
not embedded in the summaries. Through this conversation, he thought Council would give
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
staff direction to advance. There was no coordinated area plan or comprehensive study for San
Antonio Road. If Council wanted to advance that, it could be included as a workplan interest for
the Council. He indicated why the El Camino Real study had not been discussed recently. There
would be new items forthcoming in the current year that needed adoption in relation to the
Housing Element.  
City Manager Shikada commented, regarding new components of the Housing Element, that
items listed as new or items staff advanced as a part of Council’ s retreat was not intended to be
reflected in the document.  
Council Member Tanaka asked how Council Members would add items to the agenda and for a
status update on the Scooter Share that Council approved three years ago.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi noted the Scooter Share was not currently resourced but
would hopefully be added next year. He shared a number of difficulties with implementing a
scooter share or bike share program, including the potential for litter, hazards, and companies
changing their business models. He also noted that funds were diverted toward car-free streets. 
City Manager Shikada declared that items referred to the Council standing committees would
return to Council on February 27, 2023. He shared, regarding the Scooter Share, there needed
to be explicit information on funding for objectives and that it could be pursued.  
Mayor Kou sought clarification on incorporating Council items into the priorities list. She asked
how to implement the Safe Streets policy on State-owned streets and if the Scooter Share
Program was a pilot program. She also discussed the need for enforcement and education of
bicycle safety.  
City Manager Shikada remarked that as a general rule a Council vote would be required to
incorporate items in the priority list. Scooter Share was a pilot program.   
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi noted items connected to the Council priority on climate
change protection included the BPTP update and two items related to the S/ CAP. They were
selecting a vendor for the BPTP update, and a task had been included to develop bicycle
network enhancements, which he outlined. He noted tasks to be included in the BPTP update
S/ CAP. 
Vice Mayor Stone asked the difference between the BPTP update and the Safe Systems
approach. He was happy to see the City-wide strategy being developed to connect the
unhoused community to housing and services and that there would be greater engagement
with SFO on GBAS. He requested staff’s plan for education outreach
and community
engagement regarding the San Francisquito Creek flooding. He desired adoption an ordinance
implementing a comp plan policy program on creek setbacks. He voiced concern over a lack of
focus on mental health services and suggested a more proactive approach. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi described the Safe Systems approach as a policy that would
be developed within the BPTP.  
City Manager Shikada shared that there was an upcoming board meeting and neighborhood
meeting regarding San Francisquito Creek. He expected ongoing outreach and status check-ins
with community members. The midyear meeting would provide an opportunity for further
discussion and direction related to mental health. 
Community Services Director Kristin O’Kane discussed various funding and supports with
respect to mental health. The plan continued current supports but did not identify new areas of
funding.  
Council Member Veenker asked about completing the reopening of libraries and if the pre-
pandemic level budget would allow libraries to be open on Sundays and if Item XX included the
TRUST and MCRT programs. 
Director of Library Services Gayathri Kanth shared that the library was open 265 hours pre-
pandemic and with the budgeted opening, it would be 201 hours. Rinconada and Mitchell
would operate six days and the smaller libraries four days. The Mitchell Park Library would
require new employees before it could open on Sundays, which was included in the budget. 
Deputy City Manager Chantal Cotton-Gains indicated there were three programs – PERT, MCRT, 
and TRUST. It was intended that 9-8-8 could be called for MCRT and TRUST and 9-1-1 for PERT. 
She noted there was earmark funding awarded to the City, which was being tagged on to
bolster the TRUST Program for services to Palo Alto, Mountain View, and Los Altos.  
City Manager Shikada noted that MCRT and TRUST were County programs.  
Council Member Burt asked how to proceed with there being a full agenda and Item AA
needing much discussion.  
Mayor Kou provided suggestions to move forward.  
Council Member Burt remarked that Community Health and Safety should be cross referenced
with the BPTP; that the BPTP Plan was three years late in starting; the Climate Change
Adaptations and Mitigations did not address the sea level rise plan or mega wildfire risks; and
under Housing for Social and Economic Balance, Housing Element sites needed to be identified, 
including seeking grants for a coordinated area plan.  
Mayor Kou asked if the objectives being identified were to go to staff or the standing
committees. 
City Manager Shikada indicated that many of the objectives would come back to the standing
committees for recommendation to the Full Council. All would come back to the Full Council.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Council Member Lythcott-Haims commented there was an interdisciplinarity that needed to be
recognized, such as the BPTP Plan being on the list as climate but was also a public safety issue, 
etc. She asked who was responsible for the condition of El Camino Real. 
City Manager Shikada spoke of presenting the El Camino Real issue to Caltrans as it was their
responsibility. Staff would continue their advocacy and suggested all parties do the same.  
Mayor Kou specified, in terms of El Camino Real, that staff needed to reach out to Caltrans as
their input and cooperation were needed in developing a comprehensive plan for safe streets. 
All involved in the road system needed to be part of the discussion.  
City Manager Shikada would, as a next step, recognize the multiple benefits and crossover of
individual objectives.  
Council Member Lauing endorsed Council Member Burt’s comments, especially regarding sea
rise. In regard to commercial quarters downtown and Cal Ave, it needed to be specified what
was Cal Ave, what was downtown, and which was both. He opined that the wording downtown
area plan needed to be used. He suggested there be a standing committee with regard to
housing for accountability and oversight. He thought language regarding safety should be
incorporated into the bike and pedestrians master plan. He would later address suggestions he
had for wording in regard to climate change and environment.   
Council Member Tanaka opined it would be good to know where there was latitude related to
certain issues, so staff would know the priorities. He thought paving needed to be a priority for
biking and wanted a better understanding of plans for protected bike lanes. He inquired if
subsidies for EVs included smaller, more affordable mobility vehicles such as E-bikes, etc., and
thought it should be a priority.  
City Manager Shikada did not know if the objectives in front of the Council included subsidies
for E-bikes, etc. A program had not been proposed for subsidies. 
Council Member Burt indicated that subsidies for EVs was listed in the S/ CAP goals and key
actions for the three-year plan and had been discussed as a priority within the S/ CAP Ad Hoc.  
Mayor Kou queried if The Bowl bike path and Cypress Lane were included the in BPTP study and
the course for the continuing evaluation of Cypress Lane.  
Director Kamhi noted that the BPTP was a comprehensive look at a bicycle and pedestrian
network
throughout
the city, which
would
explore
creating
new pathways
and new
connections. There would be community outreach, which would help identify priority areas.  
City Manager Shikada believed Cypress Lane was a budgetary item and potentially a policy issue
for the Council but he would follow up.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Council Member Lythcott-Haims requested the words in the parenthesis in the Housing for
Social and Economic Balance section under bullet point one be stricken from the document.  
Discussion ensued with respect to the motion regarding climate change, health and safety
related to La Comida, sea level rise adaptation, plans for San Antonio, dewatering, continued
priorities, clarity of objectives, and greening of Palo Alto Airport, and it was determined that
items would be returned to Council for additional discussion and for review of incorporation
into subsequent plans. There would be a study session in a few weeks regarding the greening of
Palo Alto Airport. 
MOTION: Mayor Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to approve the proposed
objective areas, projects and resource allocations to advance the Council’ s 2023 priorities.  
Items to be returned to Council for additional discussion for consideration into 2023 objectives: 
A. 
Bulleted areas of focus and priority identified by City Council during their retreat
discussion
B. 
Discuss plans for commercial dewatering requirements
C. 
Facilitate a location for La Comida in North Palo Alto
D. 
Determine next steps for the sea level rise and adaptation plan
E.  
Construct preliminary plans for Area Plan at San Antonio and housing zoning
upgrades for Cal Ave, Downtown and El Camino Real
F.  
Adopting a safe system policy
G.  
Increase youth mental health support and funding
H.  
Evaluate funding and plan to return library services to pre-pandemic levels
I.  
Remove parentheses under bullet one for Housing for social and economic
balance
J.  
Initiate zoning changes consistent with the Comprehensive Plan regarding creek
corridor setbacks
Council Member Veenker supported the motion. She questioned if Item JJ ( Housing) addressed
ADU heights and wanted it listed as a priority. 
Director Lait stated they would not come back to Council with ADU height limits unless
directed, but there would be opportunities before June to consider and adopt ordinances. In
May, staff would bring back to Council an action item to discuss and give staff direction
regarding adopting an ordinance.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims remarked on the four priorities being delayed due to staff
being burdened with San Antonio, etc.  
City Manager Shikada expressed there needed to be a conversation related to what would not
get done in relation to the housing priority.  
Council Member Burt stated the next meeting needed to reconcile continuing actions. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Council Member Lauing was concerned that there were too many priorities. Item E seemed to
be a separate item and could be rolled into planning from a permanent housing committee and
suggested the motion indicate that preliminary timelines for multiple area plans would be
constructed. He specified that guidance was needed on the bulleted items. 
Discussion ensued regarding the motion language, area plans and grant funding, the plans
being important in the coming years, San Antonio having a disproportionate portion of housing
sites, housing and the downtown area plan, and that there could be zoning upgrades without
area plans.  
Council Member Tanaka thought there were too many items and that some should be removed
from the priorities and go to committees. He requested there be a timeline for the Scooter
Share Program. He would like to see concrete objectives for the flooding problem and the
hydro rate increase revisited because of high utility bills.  
Council Member Burt thought the best place to prioritize the Scooter Share Program was within
the S/ CAP.  
City Manager Shikada declared staff would present the hydro rate issue to the Finance
Committee next month, so there would be a near-term Council discussion.  
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka No
Council Member Lythcott-Haims proposed to keep working and having dinner at the dais. 
Mayor Kou did not think food was allowed at the dais. 
Council Member Burt asked if the consultants for Buena Vista could defer for an hour. 
City Manager Shikada thought it was fine to have dinner at the dais but Council could decide. 
Regarding the sequence of the meeting, staff could check in with the consultants to see if they
could join the meeting in 90 minutes.  
The City Council took a break from 6:33 P.M. to 6:40 P.M. 
STUDY SESSION
2. 
Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy Update and Study Session
Action: Item continued
3. 
Buena Vista Mobile Home Park Update from the Santa Clara County Housing Authority
Action: No action taken
Assistant to the City Manager Melissa McDonough noted the item was brought forward
because of enormous Council and public interest. Staff had been in conversations with the
Housing Authority, and Council would be brought up to date on next steps.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Santa Clara County Housing Authority Director Preston Prince hoped to come back to Council
with happenings at the Housing Authority globally and how they could partner with Palo Alto to
create more affordable housing in Palo Alto, but today was about Buena Vista. He listed the
values of Housing Authority staff and their skills and experience. He indicated that Buena Vista
had been a very difficult transaction, which required much time. They had a meeting in
November
2022, which
indicated
more
movement
was
needed
to
complete
the
redevelopment, and they made a pivot based on resident input. The Santa Clara Housing
Authority was committed to engaging with residents, and they were excited to work with the
City of Palo Alto to create opportunity, inclusion, and equity for the families at Buena Vista.  
Santa Clara County Housing Authority Director of Real Estate Flaherty Ward presented slides
and introduced the folks at the meeting from the Buena Vista Housing Authority team and
architects from Van Meter. She outlined a brief history and current status of the Buena Vista
Mobile Home Park. They were currently reengaging on the redevelopment plan, which they
hoped
to submit
for entitlements. She
presented
ongoing
activities, which
included
communication with residents, on-site services, property improvements, compliance in regard
to new leases and income certifications, housing inspections, and constant redevelopment
work. The park needed redevelopment due to aging infrastructure, habitability, modified
coaches not allowing infrastructure updates, and the park having compliance and code issues. 
She supplied a slide showing the product they delivered as the first phase of the Housing
Replacement Program. There had been concerns with the small square footage of the two-
bedroom units, which was due to lot size, and they hoped to solve that problem through
redevelopment. She shared a table summarizing sources and uses spent to date. She listed
community engagement they had done and what they heard, which was the foundation for
their planning, and engagement would continue. She discussed the requirements of the
regulatory agreement entered into with the City of Palo Alto and the County of Santa Clara. 
They had found a plan accomplishing the goals of preserving home ownership for all current
homeowners and improving amenities and utilities. She outlined their proposal of redeveloping
the park, which would be two separate projects consisting of mobile homes and an apartment
building. She indicated why the hybrid model was needed. They intended to engage with
residents on a variety of topics in the coming months. She furnished housing options for the
current residents on the site. Throughout
February and March, their ARWS relocation
consultant would meet with families to review options, and she urged residents to schedule
meetings. They were hoping households would make their decisions by the end of March. The
phasing and relocation plan was being drafted in regard to on-site and off-site relocation during
the redevelop and would be finalized once residents indicated their decision. Housing search
and out-of-pocket expenses would be covered by the Housing Authority. They wanted to limit
the disruption of residents’ daily lives as much as possible. She acknowledged there were a lot
of concerns from residents, and they did not have answers to all their questions, but the
process was inclusive of residents’ needs and desires, and it was important that residents
schedule individual housing meetings. It was an iterative process to determine what would be
possible and allowable and residents’ needs and desires. She shared a slide highlighting the
overall timeline.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Council Member Burt asked the height of the proposed apartments; if there was space for
recreation; if they could reverse the orientation of the apartments; and if the options for
owners purchasing a new coach would be at market rate cost.  
Director Ward indicated the apartments were 3 stories and 60 units. They were trying to create
a courtyard for outdoor space. The orientation of the apartments could be adjusted and
finalized in the coming months, and they hoped to engage with residents regarding that. The
coaches would be purchased at market cost, but they would layer financing on to make it
affordable to the families. She explained the goal of households not having a mortgage
payment.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims was also interested in reversing the orientation of the
apartments and thought three separate buildings would be more in keeping with the look and
feel of the park and questioned the cost of doing that. She asked for an explanation of the
report stating “ as ongoing compliance and property management were underway, residents
adjust to the new management and policies.” She requested Director Ward restate her
comments related to Palo Alto Unified School District. She asked the market value of a standard
size coach and who would do the appraisal. She inquired how many of the 16 pieces of
feedback from residents they planned to honor and if residents could be provided answers to
their principal questions. She would love to see Buena Vista get a dog park.  
Director Ward indicated that what was shown earlier was a schematic density analysis, and the
plan could be further refined to create the building articulation, landscaping, etc. They wanted
to get feedback from residents and then feedback from the larger community and the Council. 
Property management referred to switching from a noncompliance situation to a regulatory
agreement, leases, income certifications, etc. They were in touch with the Palo Unified School
District and hoped to have a meeting with them in the coming weeks to discuss plans. They
were sensitive to making sure as much as possible that children’ s daily lives would not be
disrupted. Once housing options were worked through, they would be able to figure out what
phasing and relocation would look like. She explained what could be done related to temporary
relocations. They were also considering on-site relocation. The market value of a standard size
coach ranged from $5,000 to maybe $ 75,000; however, she explained lease-hold interest. A
third-party assessor would determine values, which would be shared with residents as part of
the meetings with the BV advisor. Related to the 16 concerns from residents, they were
planning to issue FAQs to the residents, and for issues with no answers, they would note that
answers were being worked on. They hoped to engage with the residents regarding dog parks
and planter beds.  
Council Member Veenker queried if there was an option for owners to maintain their current
coach and why the motel deconstruction would be done before project approval.   
Director Ward stated that the majority of the coaches had been modified or were several
decades old, which would not allow them to be moved to replace the infrastructure
underneath. The motel was vacant and no longer safe, so they moved forward with requesting
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
a deconstruction permit. They planned to use that space for temporary outdoor amenities until
the park redevelopment started.  
Council Member Lauing questioned if the square footage of the two-bedroom coaches was a
constraint for acquiring new residents and if they considered the apartment building being over
30 feet to allow more units. 
Director Ward noted they intended to get folks into a unit size appropriate to family
configuration. The units they hoped to build in excess of 75 units would be family units with a
combination of one, two, and three bedrooms. As for the three-story apartment building, they
prioritized keeping the density at the level it was when the park was purchased, but the
residents could request additional units at the site.  
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Winter Dellenbach ( Speaking for Gerry Masteller, Doria Summa, Mary Sylvester, Andie Reed) 
agreed with returning the number of households to 120. She looked forward to hearing more
about relocation plans. She believed there needed to much oversight. She shared slides.  She
questioned the square footage of units and if it would be the same for mobile homes and
apartments. She was concerned with the orientation of the apartment building and asked that
it be turned or redesigned. She hoped to soon hear about total parking spaces on the site. She
worried about permanent
relocation
and replacement
housing
costs. She requested
a
mechanism for an appraisal appeal and a better idea of what the green spaces would consist of, 
and suggested Canopy be engaged ASAP. She expressed there should be a playground and
adequate community room for all on the property site and not separate for mobile homes and
apartments.  
Shana Segal, a member of the Palo Alto Unified School District School Board, was speaking for
herself. She asked the Housing Authority to relocate families at the Palo Alto Unified School
District as close to their schools as possible, for specific details of the plan ASAP, and that
transportation be provided to every student.  
Jennifer DiBrienza, Board President of the Palo Alto Unified School District, agreed with Shana
Segal’ s comments. She would like these students to be in the forefront of the plans and to stay
in the school district.  
Liz Gardner expressed that permanent long-term housing was needed badly. She believed it
was critical that the floor plans integrated a dedicated space for eat-in dining areas. She
inquired if there would be EV charging areas, covered bike lockups, if small pets would be
allowed, how a park transferred to a parcel or a property, and how a housing choice voucher
applied to a project-based voucher. She believed that floor plan and square feet did not equal
quality of life in egress and that on-site laundry was critical.  
Bob Moss opined that the area for play and open space was inadequate and suggested
converting the strip mall to community facilities as there was no community facility or meeting
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
space. He suggested considering converting
shipping containers into housing and that vacant
commercial buildings along El Camino be converted to housing. He believed everything should
be done to preserve low-income housing and possibly expand it and that facilities for Buena
Vista residents’ children should be preserved so they could continue going to local schools and
parks.  
Jessica Martin speaking on behalf of Silicon Valley At Home supported the Housing Authority
and the work they had done and would continue to do on this project. She wanted to hear a
commitment to the residents and hoped the focus would remain on current and future
residents.  
Ana Garcia, a Buena Vista resident, asked if the occupancy standards would change as there
were currently four to five people living in one-bedrooms. She expressed why a playground
area between coaches was a bad idea. She wanted to know more about the building structure, 
which she suggested it be like the structure on Ramona Street.  
Joe Simitian, Santa Clara County Supervisor and resident of Palo Alto, discussed the gratifying
results of the City of Palo Alto and the Santa Clara County Housing Authority purchasing the
Buena Vista Mobile Home Park. He was pleased to see the project move into the next phase. He
spoke of details of core priorities that needed to be refined, which could increase the number
of affordable housing units, upgrade the living environment, and preserve the sense of
community unique to Buena Vista.  
Jessica Guzman wanted the size of the units to be considered in relation to young adults having
to continue to live in the family home after high school and/ or consider units for young adults
leaving home for the first time.  
Vice Mayor Stone thought it was important to acknowledge the anxieties BV residents would
experience related to transportation to school and acknowledged Jessica Guzman’ s comments. 
He asked how the tours would occur for those considering purchase of new mobile homes. He
wondered if two- and three-bedroom units could be placed on County land for viewing. He
inquired if there was an appeals process if a resident objected to an appraisal. He was
concerned that the apartment building design created a barrier between the apartments and
the mobile homes. However, if it were flipped 180 degrees, he was concerned about the
location of the parking lot. Designs should be presented to the residents. He asked what was
the likelihood of permanent displacement.  
Director Ward planned on taking interested households to different apartment communities to
view them and hoped to show examples of something the Housing Authority currently owned
as well as other affordable housing communities close to Buena Vista. They planned to bring a
spec coach on-site, but due to space, it would probably be a one bedroom. She spoke to spec
units being placed on County land, and noted the Housing Authority would purchase the spec
units. For two and three bedroom coaches, they would arrange bus tours to the manufacturer
in Sacramento to view the units. They would try to have floorplans in the spec coach that could
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
be reviewed. They planned
on including
samples
of
choices
related to countertops, 
washer/ dryer hookups, etc. There would be an appeals process for appraisals. They did not
intend to locate anybody off site for more than 12 months. If there was displacement for more
than 12 months, they had triggered permanent relocation, which she explained.  
Mayor Kou inquired if there were compliances that owners and renters had to follow; if the five
years was clear to the residents; the occupancy limits; if there was a preference for Palo Altans
to qualify; the square footage of the studios, apartments, and one- and two-bedroom coaches; 
if parking had been developed; if existing trees within the park would be preserved; and if the
property manager would live on-site. She hoped open space would be inviting for the
apartments and those in the coaches, that noise would be taken into consideration, and that
planning would be initiated with Canopy.  
Director Ward stated there were basic compliance requirements for all on the site because of
the nature of the funding sources. The five years was clear to the residents, but more education
to residents was needed. The occupancy standards were not specific to Buena Vista but were
standards the Housing Authority used throughout its voucher program. If some residents were
to leave the park, occupancy standard requirements could be revisited to make units bigger. 
Research needed to be done related to Palo Altans having preference to qualify, which she
would return to Council with an answer. There was a wide variety of square footage sizes, 
which she outlined and stated they would likely adjust slightly upwards. She addressed there
being an issue with smaller two-bedroom coaches graduating to larger two-bedroom units. She
believed the plan provided for two parking spaces per household, and part of residents meeting
with the advisor would include an understanding of how many cars residents had. The question
was how much space would be committed to parking, and they would finalize that plan. They
were requesting a tree removal permit for two trees, which were ill, but hoped to preserve the
rest of the trees at the park, and they would work on a landscaping plan. There would be an on-
site rep from the property management company living on-site and a maintenance person and
the property manager on-site during the day.  
Council Member Burt questioned if the reconstruction of the apartments and the new mobile
homes would be in one phase or staged and if the apartments being built first could provide the
temporary location for most of the folks temporarily displaced in the mobile homes; the current
number of occupied units; and if people chose to leave the park, would it allow a lower
occupancy density per unit. He did not understand why having fewer folks stay in the park
would allow lower occupancy density per unit. He asked if fewer than 120 families could reside
in Buena Vista. He asked if Director Ward was aware of electric heat pump washer/ dryer
combos. He asked if transit passes for low income and State programs subsidizing E-bikes were
being looked at and the cost of lease plus rent/ payment on units in Buena Vista compared to
what residents had been paying.  
Director Ward indicated the intent was to stage the reconstruction of the apartments and the
new mobile homes. The apartments being built first could provide the temporary location for
most of the folks temporarily displaced in the mobile homes, but it would result in taking a
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
longer time for delivery of the new units, which would delay occupants from living permanently
in the apartment building and delay homeowners in moving back into their coaches. They
would ask the residents their preferences. There were 75 units occupied. She explained how
some homeowners leaving the park or moving into an apartment would allow for rightsizing of
mobile homes, and that they would then look to make up that density in the apartment
building. The Housing Authority Goal for Buena Vista was 120 families, but the regulatory
agreement required a minimum of 100. She was aware of electric heat pump washer/ dryer
combos. They would provide transit passes, and they intended to have bike parking. There
would be space rent for those in the mobile home park and apartment rent for those in the
apartments, not a lease. There would be an adjustment to the affordable rent as defined in the
regulatory agreement. Some would not see an increase, some a decrease, and some an
increase, all based on income.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims wanted to make sure all were aware of Palo Alto piloting a
new shuttle. She requested confirmation that the metrics presented showed that some would
want to leave the mobile home park. Increasing height could increase density. She presented
another option of a co-living situation with shared cooking, laundry, etc. With the next update, 
she suggested that someone from Buena Vista, who was partnering with the Housing Authority, 
be present.  
Director Ward commented that the base plan did not show anybody leaving and assumed all
would remain in the park. If some left the park or opted to become a renter, it could allow
rightsizing of dwellings.  
Council Member Tanaka did not agree with the apartment building orientation as presented. 
He stated that duplexes, townhouses, etc., would provide more open space than having
separate units.  He asked the income levels required to be in the mobile home park and for an
explanation of how owners with higher incomes would be affected; if there was a cost to the
City for this; and Council’ s purview over the project, if there would be entitlements, etc. 
Director Ward indicated the regulatory agreement required everybody on site be 80% AMI and
below. In the event of an owner or renter being above that, their rent would typically adjust
accordingly.  
Assistant to the City Manager McDonough noted there was a cost to the City for bailout in
2017, but there was not a cost now. The City was a party to the regulatory agreement and had
oversight in partnership with the County in the progression of the Housing Authority. The City
would go through the process of ensuring building specifications would be met. There were
small details that would be the purview of the State, which she could follow up with more
information.  
Mayor Kou asked to be advised of the dates of Buena Vista community meetings so Council
members could attend.  
PUBLIC COMMENT
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Aram James spoke of a meeting he had with respect to supporting a bill banning weaponized
police K9s, and he would send Council a copy of some comments made at the press conference.  
The City Council took a seven-minute break. 
CITY MANAGER COMMENTS ( 8:35 - 8:50 PM) 
City Manager Ed Shikada spoke of participating in Cal City’s City Managers Conference in
Carlsbad last week. He provided an update of continuing issues and concerns regarding high gas
utility bills. In March, the Finance Committee would discuss the general fund transfer and the
hydroelectric surcharge. On Wednesday, March 1 there would be a community workshop
related to the University Avenue Streetscape Project. On February 28 and March 6 through 25, 
there would be emergency preparedness training, which more information was available at
cityofpaloalto. org/ beprepared. He acknowledged Valentine’ s Day, and staff had put together a
Palo Alto Connect article indicating ways to share affection and caring across the community. 
There would not be a City Council meeting on February 20. The next meeting would be
February 27, which he outlined items scheduled for that meeting and the March 6 meeting. 
They would look at the upcoming agendas, recognizing pulling some items. He noted that the
Housing Element and the Sobrato Ad Hoc committees had concluded their work.  
ACTION ITEMS
AA2. 
Review and Accept the FY 2023 - FY 2032 Long Range Financial Forecast ( LRFF) and FY
2023 Budget Development Guidelines (Item continued from February 6, 2023 Meeting) 
City Manager Ed Shikada indicated the presentation for Items AA2 and 8 would be conducted
simultaneously.  
Mayor Kou noted that Item 8 was to discuss the FY2023 midyear budget review.  
Budget Manager Paul Harper stated that the FY2024 through 2023 LRFF and the 2023 midyear
budget review were separate items and discussed different fiscal years, but they were
connected through the recommendations and fiscal policies in each report that impacted the
current fiscal year and planning for the upcoming budget process. He provided and reviewed
slides comparing the annual surplus and gap of revenues versus expenses in the general fund
between the LRFF and the midyear report and the status of the budget stabilization reserve
BSR) through FY2023; FY2023 BSR status; budget balancing risks and benefits; and takeaways
to keep in mind when planning for the FY2024 budget process. 
Budget Manager Jessie Deschamps furnished and discussed slides related to FY2023 midyear
reinvestments and technical adjustments. She outlined next steps in the budget process. 
Following the long range and midyear discussion, staff would begin to develop and produce the
FY2024 proposed budgets. In March and April, Utilities would return to the Finance Committee
and UAC to review financial plans and rate recommendations. In late April or May, staff would
release the proposed budgets followed by meetings with the Finance Committee throughout
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
May to review the documents. In June, staff would return to City Council with a third-quarter
financial report and final review for adoption of the FY2024 budgets. Staff recommended City
Council accept the LRFF and budget development guidelines and approve amendments in the
FY2023 midyear budget and table of organization, which was consistent with actions outlined in
the report in the attachments.  
PUBLIC COMMENTS
There were no public comments. 
Mayor Kou asked if there had been changes in the LRFF since the Finance Committee meeting. 
Administrative Services Director Kiely Nose stated staff updated the LRFF for the labor contracts
approved subsequent to December. Staff then updated it a second time to reflect the midyear
actions.  
Council Member Lauing questioned which packet Council was supposed to reference tonight
and if the Finance Committee unanimously approved the numbers presented tonight.  
Budget Manager Harper indicated it was in relation to the LRFF memo, and the new packet
should be in the system.  
Director Nose declared the Finance Committee did not review the long range revisions for the
labor updates; however, they were all Council-approved adjustments.  
Council Member Burt queried if there was a base scenario plus two others provided to the
Finance Committee. 
Director Nose expressed that was correct.  
Council Member Lauing inquired if the FTEs were Council approved and if the -$3.3M in 2024
included the new taxes.  
Director Nose indicated the Council-approved action for the revised LRFF included Council-
approved labor contracts with the bargaining groups, so the revised forecast updated for all
those contracts. Midyear was a modeling of what the forecast would look like if Council
approved Item 8 in full as currently proposed. She displayed and explained Slide 2. Measure L
was in 2024. 
Budget Manager Harper stated 2024 included Measure K, but it had not started yet. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims requested an explanation of “assumptions not included.”  
Budget Manager Harper remarked that the assumptions not included were typically projects
that would need funding at some point, but they had not been scoped out nor had timelines
been adopted, so funding was not locked in. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Vice Mayor Stone requested an explanation of the assumption that the TOT tax would not
reach pre-pandemic levels until FY2026. He asked if there was tracking of cities similar to Palo
Alto; if staff could track ongoing funding of essential services related to the business tax to hold
the City accountable to promises Council made, etc.; and why Measure K was not included in
the LRFF and if it had been modeled with a prolonged or worsened recession.  
Assistant City Manager Nose noted that there was a measured growth in the TOT tax reflective
of the recovery that had been occurring as well as the average room rate and occupancy rate. 
The make-up of TOT would probably change from pre-pandemic, but they did not have that
data yet, so they were monitoring it. A significant portion was coming from business travel, not
leisure travel, but they would monitor the impacts. As for tracking of cities, they did not have
travel or hotel detail. Room capacity increased during the pandemic, which had been factored
in. As for staff tracking ongoing funding of essential services related to the business tax, the
long range had only Measure L, not K. She explained why that revenue stream was left in the
LRFF. Moving forward, there would be clear reporting of Measure K, which was part of the
measure. Measure K was included in the LRFF as an alternative scenario. She outlined the
differences in Measures L and K and stated they did not want to present the forecast in an
imbalanced way. She indicated why a recession was not modeled in Measure K.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims thought the cost of reducing/ eliminating the use of natural gas
should be anticipated in the 2023 forecast and questioned what would be associated with the
transition.  
City Manager Shikada noted that a priority for the year was for resources to plan for the gas
transition, but they did not yet have those figures.  
Council Member Lauing queried why this was being done now as opposed to waiting until the
end of March and how much projection, forecast, and trend data might change over the next
six weeks. He addressed FTEs not being one-time funding. He asked if the Finance Committee
should review the added expenses.  
Assistant City Manager Nose specified that AA2 was the starting point for staff’s planning for
the annual budget process, and it was important staff get direction so they would have a
proposed budget by the end of April/ beginning of May. She explained why the long range
document was important and why the midyear budget needed to be done before March. She
did not think there would be large changes over the next six weeks that would impact the
Council’ s policy decisions for the midyear 2023 budget. Any changes between now and March
would likely be something staff would plan as part of the FY2024 budget.  
Council Member Burt stated he had asked if the Finance Committee could meet before this
meeting to look at the midyear budget amendments and staff believed it was best to come
directly to the Council. He referenced Slide 10 and queried if there was a projected surplus of
1.3M before making the adjustments. He indicated there were discretionary decisions totaling
9M and $14M into a new Budget Uncertainty Reserve, which were different from revenue and
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 21 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
expense changes, and questioned what the surplus was used for. He asked why the Measure K
revenue was not forecasted, as the Council had made commitments of one-third each for
transportation, affordable housing funding, and maintaining the restoration of public safety
staffing. He did not understand why there was an alternative with a recession adjustment but
not an alternative adding in Measure K dollars. He thought the LRFF should include Measure K
with uses of the funds committed to by the Council and what would now be a prudent
adjustment for a recession. He had difficulty adopting one of the three scenarios when he did
not agree with any of them. He would support moving forward with the base case but adjusting
for the alternative modeling Measure K and the recession. He asked for the projected TOT this
year compared to the pre-pandemic total. The Economic Development Report indicated the
projected TOT this year would equal the previous peak, and it needed to be reconciled. 
Electrification costs would for the most part be through the utility fund, not general fund
dollars. He asked where the City was year to date with regard to the document transfer tax and
for a projection and for the long-term projections for sales tax. He explained why TOT should be
researched related to extended stay. 
Budget Manager Harper confirmed that Council Member Burt’s math was correct but
referenced and outlined Slide 3. He noted that $5M of the uncertainty reserve was part of the
surplus Council approved on previous review.  
Assistant City Manager Nose commented that the Measure K alternative scenario had been
provided and that adding it was a policy call. When this was originally created, Measure K had
not passed. Council could direct staff to move forward with the base case with Measure K and
recession adjustments.  
Budget Manager Deschamps commented the $6M adjustment to major tax revenues included
4M for TOT, which was $22.2M.  
Manager of Debt and Financing Tarun Narayan stated $2.6M in document transfer tax had been
received as of the middle of January. The projection for 2023 was around $6.4M. The peak was
in 2022 at almost $ 12M. He explained why they were conservative related to the TOT
projections. He would have to look at the sales tax projections, but he thought there were
timing issues related to it. They could use 2018 as a base, which would indicate recovery. 
Comparing TOT to pre-pandemic was not a good comparison due to the number of rooms being
substantially higher than pre-pandemic.  
Council Member Tanaka asked if there was a chart of vacancies over time and why Council did
not know about the expected surplus earlier and why it was a surprise, and he agreed with
what was written by the press. It seemed reasonable to stop the gas transfer since there was
more revenue than expected. He did not agree with Packet Pages 52 and 53 regarding utility
rates. He queried if a Division Manager of Parks was a new position and the necessity of the
position. He would push back on management positions versus people in the field. He wanted
to see library hours expanded. He questioned if the current budget included the $14.6M in
raises given last week; if staff was budgeting in City contracts being 20% to 30% higher than
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 22 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
inflation; and if the salary and benefits on Table 6 should be higher. Measure K revenue and
items not included in the forecast should be included in the budget. He requested a
spreadsheet showing Homekey, S/ CAP, and Measure K lines, so each could do their own
analysis. It was not clear to him what was and was not in the budget. He suggested the City use
zero-based budgeting.  
City Manager Ed Shikada remarked a chart of vacancies over time was not a referral for this
item and was typically a part of the annual budget. As the discussion consisted of midyear
versus the annual budget, Council had the discretion of deferring major budget actions to the
annual budget as opposed to the midyear. Regarding the expected surplus being characterized
as a surprise, tonight’ s conversation was a great example how staff was trying to be responsive
at a quicker pace to address the urgency of continuing to move on the Council’ s priorities. 
There may be problems created by trying to move processes at a pace faster than they had
been designed to do. He addressed the normal annual and midyear cycles, and perhaps staff
had been too responsive in setting expectations that the information would be available sooner
than the traditional calender. Council action was needed for the midyear adjustment to include
the $14.6M in raises. 
Assistant City Manager Nose noted the expected surplus was not a surprise. Council had
brought forward and an expected surplus had been discussed as part of the budget balancing
strategy last year, which was why the use of the BSR was used as part of the balancing strategy. 
It was higher than staff expected, but they had been tracking to have higher revenues and
lower expenses than budgeted. They did their best in May to account for the estimates at the
time of Council’ s budget process. The Division Manager of Parks would be a working manager
and would work on the priority projects identified by Council. She discussed how City contracts
were budgeted in. She explained the salary and benefit assumptions in the LRFF reflecting
Council’ s authority for negotiations as well as contract approvals. The $7M that Council pledged
for Homekey was included in the forecast, but any changes to that number and unknown
expenses were not included. Regarding a spreadsheet showing Homekey, S/ CAP, and Measure
K lines, staff could not provide that estimate due to the projects not being far enough along, 
etc.  
Budget Manager Harper indicated a Division Manager of Parks was a new position. The revised
LRFF and midyear budget included the $14.6M in raises.  
Council Member Lauing believed the Division Manager referenced in the packet may have been
a replacement. He did not know how much of the financial aid to Team Sheeper should be part
of this budget. He opined that funding for JMV made good sense. He addressed Library Services
listing $30K in the text for DEI, but the ongoing fees did not list it. He wondered if the Finance
Committee should bring the expense side of this back to Council in three or four weeks. He
thought Council could address now the direction for the baseline and the budgeting.    
Mayor Kou asked staff if they had a timeline in terms of developing the annual budget for the
next fiscal year and if they would be looking for the approval of new hires soon. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 23 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Assistant City Manager Nose stated if it were to go back to the Finance Committee, they would
send it as early as March 7 and then return to the Full Council the end of March/ beginning of
April. Staff had to have the 2024 budgets balanced by the end of March. In February and
March, staff would work to prepare and release the FY2024 budget, and there would be
Finance Committee discussions in May. If there were Finance Committee discussions in May, 
the Council would not see midyear until April, and she would be unable to reconcile if there
were any conflicts between the two documents. The alternative was the midyear adjustments
could be rolled into the proposed, and there could be a broader discussion as to how Council
would move forward for FY2024. This was brought forward in such a large capacity based on
Council’ s desire to move at a pace faster than normal.  
City Manager Shikada commented they were trying to start priority hires in advance of the
annual budget.  
Council Member Veenker stated it would be nice to provide more services and make some
reinvestments. She felt that Slide 10 was more than technical adjustments. She wondered if the
Budget Uncertainty Reserve should go back to the Finance Committee. She would be more
comfortable with an increase from $5M to $10M versus $ 14M. She inquired if others were
comfortable moving forward with some of the reinvestments.  
Assistant City Manager Nose commented that the Budget Uncertainty Reserve was a Council
choice, and she outlined why the majority of the Finance Committee chose to establish it.  
Council Member Burt commented on nomenclature and expressed that reinvestment meant
restoring services and one-time revenues were not used for one-time expenses but bridged
ongoing expenses. He was comfortable accepting the midyear budget recommended by staff if
Measure K revenue and recessionary impact were factored in. He mentioned that conservative
revenues and expenses were projected.  
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lauing to adopt the Long
Range Fiscal Forecast FY 2024-2033 base case, with the addition of Measure K revenue to be
allocated based on the previous Council commitments for use of those funds; 1/ 3 toward
affordable housing, 1/3 toward transportation focused on local share of grade separations and
1/3 toward retaining public safety staffing.  
Council Member Tanaka was unclear if the items on Page 12 were included in the LRFF. He
asked the maker and seconder to include a placeholder for an estimate of the assumptions not
included in the forecast. He agreed that Measure K should be included. He asked about the
expense increase for contractors and thought 5% was too low. 
Assistant City Manager Nose answered that the items on Page 12 and subsequent pages were
not included in the forecast. The $ 7M for Project Homekey was included in the forecast but
capital cost increases and additional operating costs needs were not included. Regarding the
expense increase for contractors, they adjusted for contracts already approved and beyond
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 24 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
that a blanket 5%. Some but not all contracts would come up for approval in the next year or
two.  
Council Member Burt declined the request to include a placeholder for an estimate of the
assumptions not included in the forecast.  
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka No
8. 
Discuss the FY 2023 Mid-Year Budget Review and Approve 1) FY 2023 Budget
Amendments
in Various
Funds, and 2) Amendments
to the
FY 2023 Table of
Organization to add 5.25 full-time and 2.43 part-time Full Time Equivalent ( FTE) 
Positions
Mayor Kou asked what the Bay Area Water Supply and Conservation Agency membership fee
increased to and for the connection between adding a JMZ educator and revenues increasing
by a new ceramics class.  
Budget Manager Paul Harper commented that the Bay Area Water Supply and Conservation
Agency membership fee increased from $321K to $416K, but acknowledged why it would not
increase that much on an annual basis. 
Assistant City Manager Kiely Nose clarified that adding a JMZ educator and revenues increasing
by a new ceramics class was the body of work being done and was not specific to JMZ services.  
Vice Mayor Stone queried how one FTE Court Liaison would help support the criminal justice
reform goals for 2023, and if there would be funding from the County to offset costs and how
the City had fared without that position. He was interested in hearing information related to
restoration of library hours and other service needs. He inquired why the ambulance insurance
program had not been embraced by the community and if staff had ideas for increasing public
outreach.  
Police Chief Andrew Binder explained that criminal justice reform was one part of the FTE Court
Liaison, and he discussed why it was asked for. It would be administrative work absorbed by all
law enforcement agencies within the county. He discussed the role of the Court Liaison, which
would support officers delivering public safety service. 
Assistant City Manager Nose replied that the public response and adoption of the ambulance
insurance program was significantly less than expected. They could spend more on marketing, 
but, at this time, they did not expect to see the numbers they had seen in other communities. 
She spoke of revenue estimates being a small concern.  
Fire Chief Geo Blackshire spoke of the ambulance subscription service and the marketing, and
they had not gotten the response other cities had gotten. He thought there was still an
opportunity for the service and that there may need to be different marketing. They would
have a meeting this week to determine how to present the message.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 25 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Mayor Kou suggested, in regard to the ambulance subscription service, that people receive
information as to what the fee would fund.  
Fire Chief Blackshire expressed that fee funding was included in the information.  
Council
Member
Lythcott-Haims requested
staff, at some point, provide
Council with
information on how to narrate to residents the City’s surplus in the face of the gas bills.  
City Manager Ed Shikada noted the communication provided attempted to provide basic
information Council members could use regarding the City’s surplus, including an article by
Director of Utilities Dean Batchelor. In doing near-term rebates to defray residents’ gas
expenses, staff had run scenarios related to the midyear, and that information would be shared
with Council. He remarked it was preliminary but a 10% gas rebate to residents for December
and January would equate to approximately $ 1.3M, and a 20% rebate for January would be
1.7M.  
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Mayor Kou to approve the FY 2023 Mid-
Year Budget Review as recommended by staff by amending the Fiscal Year 2023 Budget
appropriation for: 
1. Amendments to the Fiscal Year 2023 Budget Appropriation for various funds and various
capital projects, as identified in Attachment A and Attachment A, Exhibit 1 and 2
requires a supermajority, 2/ 3 approval); and
2. Amend the FY 2023 Table of Organization in Attachment B consistent with the budget
amendments in Attachment A, adding 5.25 full time and 2.43 part time FTE positions.  
3. Return with a specific recommendation regarding a residential rebate of up to 20% of
the highest month whichever is higher the January or February gas bill and a similar
proposed electric rebate following the Finance Committee discussion
Council Member Lauing thought most of it was fine, but going to the Finance Committee would
have been ideal. He proposed the motion indicate approval of all the Community Service
Department’ s recommendations except Sheeper.   
Community Services Director Kristen O’Kane noted that replastering the pool required closure
for 45 days. The agreement with Sheeper was a revenue contract, and they would not be paid a
management fee. Salaried employees would be supported during the time of pool closure.  
Mayor Kou asked if there would be a second payment to UNAF and questioned the timing of
the payment. 
Director O’Kane would have to research, but she believed the payment to UNAF was a one-time
payment in addition to the funds provided to them for promotions, banners, and rental space.  
Council Member Burt thought there was a one-time outside the budget and that staff would
incorporate it in the budget on an ongoing basis. It needed to be revisited.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 26 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
Director O’Kane expressed the ongoing aspect was part of the FY2024 budget. That would be an
item for the coming budget process.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims requested a friendly amendment regarding residential gas and
electric rebates. 
Council Member Burt accepted the amendment related to gas rebates. There would be a
review of hydroelectric at the next Finance Committee meeting, which would come to the
Council with a recommendation in March or April.  
Council Member Veenker asked if the cost of midyear reinvestments to get back to pre-
pandemic levels for the library could be estimated; if she should advocate for more resources
for the library regarding hiring for services; and if they had the resources, could they get more
personnel for services this year.  
Library Director Gayathri Kanth thought it would be close to $800K in reinvestment to get back
to pre-pandemic levels for the library. She noted libraries had opened in the last two years, but
services had not increased. They would come back to Council concerning bringing programming
back. She always agreed with advocating for more resources. Regarding resources and
personnel for services this year, Council would see the budget proposal in two or three months, 
which from a timing perspective would work out well. 
Council Member Tanaka requested an explanation of BSR versus the Budget Uncertainty
Reserve.  
Mayor Kou remarked the Budget Uncertainty Reserve maintained the BSR at a level that was
not too high and allocated funds to make sure there were funds for the next couple years, and
it was designated to fund matters at that time.  
Council Member Burt explained the BSR was a long-term reserve fund and the budget
uncertainty was specifically over a two-year period that was a defined gap.  
Mayor Kou questioned if excess BSR would be allocated to the 115 or CIP. 
Budget Manager Paul Harper acknowledged it was policy of the Council that excess BSR be split
between the 115 and CIP. The Finance Committee decided to not allocate the BSR strictly to the
115 and CIP but to reserve some for the uncertainty reserve due to economic uncertainty.  
Council Member Tanaka did not agree with the Budget Uncertainty Reserve. He asked staff to
comment on the timing of approval of permitting building inspections for businesses trying to
reopen, and if hiring another person would help speed up the process. He asked if the maker
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 27 of 27
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  2/13/2023
would be open to the motion referencing more library hours versus the Division Manager FTE. 
He asked if the motion could be split. 
Planning and Transportation Director Jonathan Lait indicated they were within 48 hours of
responding to building inspections. They were anticipating recruiting a couple positions, which
he thought one was part of this request item. They were trying to fill vacancies, and he could
take Council Member Tanaka’ s ideas for the next budget cycle, but he did not have additional
requests tonight.  
Council Member Burt noted the building inspection positions had been authorized but there
had not been hirings. He declined the request in reference to library hours and the Division
Manager FTE. 
Assistant City Attorney Caio Arellano discussed why he believed the motion could not be split.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
9. 
Discussion and Possible Revision to 2023 Standing Committee Topics
Action: Removed From Consideration
COUNCIL MEMBER QUESTIONS, COMMENTS, ANNOUNCEMENTS
Mayor Kou thanked and congratulated Council Member Veenker and Karen Fernandez in
Bloomington, Indiana, for kicking off the Sibling Cities Civil Discourse Series. 
Council Member Veenker thanked Mayor Kou for appearing at the Sibling Cities Civil Discourse
Series kickoff and giving a thoughtful speech.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims announced that Molly Tuttle & The Golden Highway won an
award for the Best Bluegrass Album at the Grammys last Sunday night for the album Crooked
Tree. Molly Tuttle was a graduate of Palo Alto High School. She commended the Chamber of
Commerce for doing their Valentine’ s event at Town & Country last Thursday. She opined there
should be more events like it to promote frequenting local businesses.   
ADJOURNMENT
The meeting was adjourned at 11:54 P.M.  
