CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 27
Special Meeting
June 19, 2023
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely:  
Absent:  
Call to Order
Mayor Kou called the meeting to order in Honor of Caribbean- American Heritage Month.  
Interim City Clerk Mahealani Ah Yun called roll and noted that all were present.  
Special Orders of the Day
1. 
Proclamation Honoring Juneteenth 2023
Mayor Kou announced that it was Palo Alto’s second year bringing forward a proclamation for
Juneteenth. The proclamation this year was being presented formally to Live In Peace. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims read the proclamation. She declared that Mayor Lydia Kou on
behalf of the entire City Council recognized and celebrated June 19 as Juneteenth Freedom Day
and called upon the community reaffirm the commitment to eradicate hate, racism, and
inequity and to continue the work of equity, justice, and hope.  
Live In Peace Executive Director Heather Starnes-Logwood voiced that Bob Hoover, who had
been honored before, could not attend this meeting. On behalf of Bob Hoover and Live In
Peace, they were thankful for the recognition. She thought it was important to remember that
when everybody was not free, nobody was free. They celebrated because it represented the
truth of freedom in our Country. She commented that Eugene Jackson along with a group of
community partners revived the Juneteenth celebrations after a lull. She thanked Palo Alto for
their partnership with Live In Peace.  
Mayor Kou invited Executive Director Starnes-Logwood to the dais for a photo and to receive
the proclamation and thanked them for their work.  
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
City Manager Ed Shikada stated there were some title changes on a couple items. He noted for
the public that an item had been added to the end of the Agenda – the proposed Friendship
City Program – and there was a Colleagues’ Memo.  
Public Comment
Liz Gardner recognized this holiday and spoke of poverty, housing, rent discrimination, wage
disparities, and a lack of teen resources for the underserved in Palo Alto. She informed the
public ( as she had already informed Council) of a lease violation her household had received
and, relatedly, she indicated there was little outdoor space at Mayfield Place, and she did not
know which neighborhood Mayfield Place belonged to. She felt that complex was being
subjected to oppressive rules and regulations with no resources. She hoped Council would
address these issues and provide some answers.  
Sharon Huang claimed that a resident was using an R1 residential neighborhood to operate a
car rental business. She had videos of the happenings, and evidence had been forwarded to the
City. She had been told there was no code violation. She asked the City to enforce the existing
zoning code.  
JT Chen spoke of safety, security, parking, and traffic concerns related to a resident using an R1
residential neighborhood to operate a car rental business. He indicated it was a code violation
of 18.42.0.60. He urgently requested the City’s assistance in enforcing the existing zoning code.  
Zolik Fichtenholz supported the previous comments concerning a resident using an R1
residential property to operate a car rental business. He voiced that this activity would set a
precedent if not addressed. He submitted a letter he had written to Code Enforcement, which
he had not received a reply to. He also submitted an exhibit in the form of a photo. He
requested the City enforce the codes and address the issue.  
Rachel Croft commented on the reconsideration of the viaduct as an option for the Churchill
crossing and explained why it was disappointing and troubling. She shared slides and discussed
the narrow corridor, a shoefly track, viaduct distance from her fence, track and wire elevations, 
freight trains, and derailments. She asked Council to reconsider their reconsideration of the
viaduct.   
Aram James ( Zoom) commended the City for honoring Juneteenth. He was concerned that it
had not been declared a City holiday. He spoke of Bob Hoover’ s good work and him being
excluded from purchasing property in the past. He suggested there be a conversation about
reparations. He addressed an article regarding last week’s LifeMoves decision.  
Temo Aguilar (Zoom), a field representative for the NorCal Carpenters Union Local 405, shared
what the union had done for him and his family when local projects adopted labor standards. 
He discussed apprenticeship programs improving lifestyles. He voiced that the union also
offered an excellent healthcare program. He stated that adopting a living wage, apprenticeship
program, and health program would raise the standard of living.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Phoebe
Mota-Judges ( Zoom), a representative
of
PASCC, addressed
air quality, rising
temperatures, droughts, and fires. She indicated that the American Lung Associations’ State of
Air Report gave Santa Clara County an F in graded areas for high ozone days and 24-hour
particle pollution. She discussed health concerns with gas appliances in homes. She urged
Council to set a sunset date to end the flow of natural gas and that there be resources to
ensure a smooth and equitable transition.    
Carla Befera thanked Council for Item 13 on the Consent Calendar. She noted that members for
that Committee were approved by 100% of neighbors. She voiced that the school announced it
would remain on campus in the next calendar year, but due to adding enrollment, extra
students would be housed at the JCC. She discussed her concerns regarding school events
impacting the neighborhood and asked Council to address it.  
Albert Lustre (Zoom) with Local 405 was glad to see new development coming to the city and
asked that City projects be built by responsible general contractors who would hire locally and
provide apprenticeships, healthcare, and a livable wage.  
Council Member Burt asked if there were follow-ups for the public comments related to
Mayfield Place and the issue of operating a commercial business in a residential neighborhood. 
City Manager Ed Shikada stated they would be reviewing code enforcement related to
operating a commercial business in a residential neighborhood. He would investigate the
Mayfield Place issue and inform Council.  
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements
Vice Mayor Stone declared that in consultation with Mayor Kou they were proposing to allocate
10K from the Council Contingency Fund toward Third Thursday to help revitalize businesses
and provide the community with a gathering place. He attended the last event and invited all to
attend future events.  
Mayor Kou added that these funds would come from the FY2023 Council Contingency Fund and
would be in partnership with Chamber of Commerce and the Third Thursday Committee. 
Appropriations would go to the Chamber of Commerce for disbursement. She had met with
President Biden today, and he committed to move forward with his action plan to invest in
America, especially in climate and dedicating $ 600M toward it. She had attended last week’s
ABAG General Assembly and she explained that they were having trouble with their CalPERS, so
there would be an increase to ABAG dues. Palo Alto’s dues were $17,749 in FY2022-2023 and in
FY2023- 2024, the dues would be $19,524.  
Council Member Burt spoke of the significance of the event with the President. 
Consent Calendar
2. 
Approval of Minutes from May 22, 2023 and June 5, 2023 Meetings
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
3. 
Approval of a Purchase Order with The Public Restroom Company in the Amount of
369,749 to Provide and Install a Modular Restroom Building at the Cubberley
Community Center Fields for the Cubberley Field Restroom Capital Project ( CB-17002); 
CEQA status – exempt under CEQA Guidelines Section 15303
4. 
Approval of Construction Contract Number C23187877 with Casey Construction, Inc. in
the amount of $410,604, Authorization for the City Manager to Negotiate and Execute
Change Orders up to a Not-to-Exceed Amount of $41,060, and approval of a FY 2023
Budget Amendment in the Stormwater Management Fund for the Trash Capture Device
Installation Project, Capital Improvement Program Project SD-22002; CEQA status – 
exempt under CEQA Guideline Section 15303. 
5. 
Utilities Advisory Commission
Recommends
Adoption of the 2023 Annual Water
Shortage Assessment Report
6. 
Grant of Easements to City of Mountain View for the City of Mountain View’s Phase 2
San Antonio Area Sewer Main Improvements Project. CEQA Status – Exempt Under
CEQA Guidelines Section 15378(b)(5). 
7. 
Approval of Construction Contract with OBS Engineering, Inc. (# C23187759) in the
Amount of $4,199,222 and Authorization for the City Manager to Negotiate and Execute
Change Orders up to a Not-to-Exceed Amount of $ 419,922 for the Boulware Park
Improvements project ( PE-17005) and Green Stormwater Infrastructure project ( SD-
22001); and Approval of FY 2023 Budget Amendments in the Park Development Impact
Fee, Stormwater Management, and Capital Improvement Funds; CEQA status—exempt
under CEQA Guidelines sections 15301 ( existing facilities), 15302 ( replacement or
reconstruction), 15303 (small structures), and 15311 (accessory structures) 
8. 
Approval of the Conceptual Plan for Quiet Zone at Palo Alto Avenue/ Alma Street Rail
Crossing and Direct Staff to Proceed with Design and Construction of the Project. CEQA
status – categorically exempt (Regulation 15301). 
9. 
Approval of: (1) a Purchase Order with Pivot Interiors Inc. in the Amount of $756,021
and (2) a Purchase Order with One Workplace in the Amount of $480,229 for the Public
Safety Building Capital Project ( PE-15001); CEQA: Environmental Impact Report for the
Public Safety Building and New California Avenue Area Parking Garage ( Resolution No. 
9772) 
10. 
Approval of a one-year General Services contract with Stephen Ciari Plumbing and
Heating, Inc. for Backflow Prevention Devices Testing, Repair, and Certification Services
and Approval of a FY 2023 Budget Amendment in the General Fund; CEQA Status – 
Categorically Exempt 15301 and 15302
11. 
Approval of Amendment
No. 1 with South Bay Regional
Public Safety Training
Consortium ( Contract No S23187799) for Fire Academy and Other Training Services
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
extended through 12/ 31/ 2023 and increasing the total compensation by $114,370 for a
total contract amount not to exceed $199,000. CEQA status: not a project. 
12. 
Approval of the Fiscal Year 2024 Investment Policy
13. 
City Council Appointment of the Castilleja Neighborhood Committee in Accordance With
Condition Number 33 Contained in Record of Land Use Action 2022-22 Authorizing
Redevelopment
of
Private
School
at
1310
Bryant
Street ( Castilleja
School). 
Environmental Assessment: Exempt from CEQA Pursuant to CEQA Guidelines Section
15061(b)(3). 
14. 
Authorization for the City Manager to Negotiate and Execute a Memorandum of
Understanding and Funding Agreement with Peninsula Corridor Joint Powers Board
Caltrain) and the City of Menlo Park Regarding Emergency Repairs to the North Bank of
the San Francisquito Creek
15. 
Adopt an Ordinance Amending Palo Alto Municipal Code ( PAMC) Section 9.10.060 (f) 
and Adoption of a Resolution to Modify the Administrative Penalty Schedule Related to
Enforcement of the City’s Gas-Powered Leaf Blower Ban. Environmental Analysis: Not
Subject to CEQA Review in Accordance with CEQA Guidelines 15061(b)(3). 
16. 
Approval of a Purchase Order with Aviat Networks in the Amount of $438,907 for Radio
Communication Systems for the New Public Safety Building Capital Project ( PE-15001), 
including $ 399,007 for Basic Services and $ 39,900 for Additional Services; CEQA: 
Environmental Impact Report for the PSB and New California Avenue Area Parking
Garage (Resolution No. 9772) 
17. 
Authorization to Execute Amendment to Legal Services Contract S22184420 with Rankin
Stock Heaberlin Oneal to Increase Amount by $150,000 for Total Not-to-Exceed Amount
of $225,000 and to Extend the Term to January 2025; CEQA Status – Not a Project
18. 
Approval of Contract with VOX Network Solutions ( C23187554) to Procure Services to
Upgrade the City’s Phone System and a Three-Year Support Term for a Total Amount
Not-To-Exceed $504,107; CEQA Status—not a project
19. 
Approval and authorization to execute contract Amendment No. 2 with the OIR Group
for an additional two-year period and an additional $ 105,000 for a new not-to-exceed
amount of $212,500 for independent police auditing services with a new expiration date
of January 1, 2025. 
20. 
Approval of Amendment Number 3 to the Agreement With Palo Alto Unified School
District ( PAUSD) for PAUSD Athletic Field Brokering and Maintenance Cost-sharing to
Extend the Term to June 30, 2024, with an Optional Extension for an Additional Six
Months; CEQA status – categorically exempt (Regulation 15301). 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
21. 
Approval of the 2023-2024 Human Relations Commission Work Plan; CEQA Status – Not
a Project
22. 
Approval of Office of City Auditor Remote and Flexible Work Study Report; CEQA Status
Not a Project
23. 
Approval of Office of City Auditor Task Order Change - 04.16 ALPR Technology Contract
Management; CEQA Status – Not a Project
24. 
Approval of Office of City Auditor Task Order Change - 
04.19 Disaster Recovery
Preparedness; CEQA Status – Not a Project
25. 
Approval of Office of City Auditor
Task Order Change - 
FY23-01 Citywide
Risk
Assessment & FY23-02 Annual Audit Plan; CEQA Status – Not a Project
26. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of an Ordinance Amending Section 2.04.010 ( Regular
Meeting) of Chapter 2.04 ( Council Organization and Procedure) of the Palo Alto
Municipal Code to Change the City Council Meeting Start Time from Six p.m. to Five- 
Thirty p.m. (FIRST READING: June 5, 2023 PASSED 7-0) 
27. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of an Ordinance Amending Section Palo Alto Municipal
Code Chapter 9.68, Rental Housing Stabilization, to Clarify the Definitions of At-Fault
and No-Fault Just Cause for Evictions, Extend Just Cause Eviction Protections and Tenant
Relocation Assistance to More Rental Units in Palo Alto than Offered by State Law, and
Adopt a Security Deposit Limit for Unfurnished Rental Units in Palo Alto. Environmental
Assessment: Exempt under CEQA Guidelines Section 15061(b)(3). (FIRST READING: June
5, 2023 PASSED 6-1) 
Public Comment
Liz Gardner – Item 15, 27 – commented that there should be more stringent regulation and
oversight on operation times of gas-powered leaf blowers. She discussed the importance of the
City supporting renters related to outdoor space and living wages.  
Ken Horowitz – Items 3, 20, 37 – noted that Items 3, 20, and 27 related to Cubberley or PAUSD. 
He supported the items. He commented that a restroom was needed but the land belonged to
PAUSD, and he had concerns that the lease
may not continue. He asked that the
implementation of these projects be delayed as the City would be entering negotiations, which
could provide the City with leverage.  
Becky Sanders ( Zoom) – Item 7 – stated she was excited by the Boulware Park improvements
and hoped it would be funded in its entirety.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Aram James ( Zoom) – Item 9, 16 – opined that there were too many items on the Consent
Calendar. He asked why items 9 and 16 were not agendized as action items. He discussed the
cost of purchase orders and the budget and referenced an article in the Daily Post.  
Alison 1831*** 062, a volunteer for Downtown Streets Team, thanked Council for their support
of the program and discussed her personal experience in the program.  
Council Member Tanaka asked which consent items were being addressed, Items 2 through 27
or Items 30 through 40. 
City Manager Ed Shikada clarified that currently Items 2 through 27 were before Council. The
second Consent Calendar contained items that were dependent on the budget approval, so
there would be a second Consent Calendar after budget discussions, and he believed there
would be additional public comment on those items.  
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 9, 17, 18, 27. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Stone moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to approve
Agenda Item Numbers 2-27. 
MOTION PASSED 2-8, 10-16, 19-26: 7-0
MOTION PASSED 9, 17, 18, 27: 6-1, Tanaka no
Council Member Tanaka spoke to his no votes and shared slides. He remarked that there were
many consent items on the calendar. He addressed Item 9 and the high cost of office furniture
and noted that the purchase orders did not break down the cost. He remarked that the Staff
Report did not include the contract that was to be approved for Item 17 nor did the Staff
Report did indicate that there had been multiple bids related to Item 18. He thought it was
important to get multiple bids. Regarding Item 27, he stated he previously voted no and still
noted no.  
City Manager Comments
City Manager Ed Shikada discussed the President’ s visit to the city and security and thanked the
public for their cooperation. He had received questions around the City’s practice of celebrating
Juneteenth, so he provided some background for community members’ awareness. The HRC
had requested additional information on how best to recognize and celebrate dates of historic
significance, and a report was pending, which the HRC should receive shortly. He expected that
the Council approved dates for the calendar year would be done each year, and in future years, 
there would be an opportunity to consider and adjust how the dates would be celebrated. He
announced that the allocation of funds from the City Council Contingency Fund was a new
procedure, and the process was included in the Policy and Procedures Handbook. Concerning
the Consent Calendar, he noted that Council could ask questions of staff prior the Council
meeting, which would give staff an opportunity to respond to questions before the meeting. If
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
new issues were raised at a meeting, staff may not be able to provide information at that time. 
He declared that the purchase agreement related to Item 18 was competitively solicited and
explained that individual procurements for every contract was not required. He shared slides
and discussed upcoming events. He reminded all that fireworks continued to be illegal in Palo
Alto and encouraged attending professional fireworks shows. He discussed Summer Reading for
a Cause. He noted that there would be a wildfire preparedness information session on July 6. 
Upcoming Council items included a number of pre-screenings and hearings on August 7, 14, and
21.  
Action Items
28. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Finance Committee Recommends Adoption of Four Resolutions: 1) 
Approving the Fiscal Year 2024 Wastewater Collection Utility Financial Plan, Proposed
Reserve
Transfers, and Increasing
Wastewater
Rates by Amending
Wastewater
Collection Rate Schedules S-1, S-2, S-6 and S-7; 2) Approving the Fiscal Year 2024 Water
Utility Financial Plan, Proposed Reserve Transfers, and Increasing Water Rates by
Amending Water Rate Schedules W-1, W-2, W-3, W-4, and W-7; 3) Amending Utility
Rate Schedules EDF-1 and EDF-2, to Increase Dark Fiber Rates by 4.9 Percent and
amending Rate Schedule EDF-3 to make technical revisions with no rate change; and 4) 
Amending Utility Rate Schedule D-1 Increasing the Storm Water Management Fee by 4.9
Percent per Month per Equivalent Residential Unit for FY 2024; and CEQA Status: Not a
project under CEQA Guidelines Section 15378(b)(4) and ( 5) and exempt under Public
Resources Code Sec. 21080(b)(8) and CEQA Guidelines Section 15273(a) 
Mayor Kou declared that there would first be a public hearing on proposed changes to
wastewater collection and water rates as required by the California Constitution and then dark
fiber rates and the stormwater management fee would be considered separately.  
Utilities Director Dean Batchelor voiced that there had been numerous meetings with the UAC, 
Finance Committee, and City Council. The proposed rate changes had been reviewed, which
staff recommended. The meetings were summarized in the report before Council, which
included staff recommendations.  
Senior Resources Planner Lisa Bilir represented the Rates team for the Utilities Department, and
other members of the team were available for questions. The item before Council addressed
the adoption of four resolutions related to water, wastewater, fiber, and stormwater.  
City Attorney Molly Stump expressed that staff could address all the resolutions now and then
the order of work would be adjusted to take that into account. 
Senior Resources Planner Bilir furnished slides and discussed the Water rate proposal, the
increase in rates and effects on customers’ bills, and staff’s proposal to transfer funds. She
summarized the Finance Committee, UAC, and staff’s recommendation.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Council Member Tanaka asked if there was a year-by-year breakdown of operation cost.  
Council Member Lauing inquired how the prior estimated increase compared to the 5% 
increase. 
Senior Resources Planner Bilir answered that the prior increase would have been about 6%. As
for the year-by-year operation cost, she furnished a slide showing water distribution cost
trends. 
Council Member Burt queried, related to the SFPUC commodity rate, what was currently paid
per acre foot and what might be paid when the advanced water recycling facility was
operational.  
Senior Resources Planner Bilir responded that currently $4.75 was being paid, which was about
2K per acre foot, which would go up to $5.21. The SFPUC projected that the rate would be flat
over the next couple years. Staff had a 10-year projection, but she did not have it with her.  
Senior Resources Planner Bilir displayed slides and addressed the Wastewater Utility increase
proposal and Wastewater cost and revenue projections. She detailed the recommendation for
Wastewater.  
Council Member Burt questioned if the replacement rate would be increased between now and
2026 and if Slide 8 indicated the increase in the next few years would be to pay for the Capital
Replacement Program. He discussed the City underinvesting since 2018 and indicated that the
City needed to catch up to maintain infrastructure.  
Senior Resources Planner Bilir replied that they were planning on an increase, but the five-mile
project construction would begin in FY2026. She acknowledge that Slide 8 indicated the
increase would be to pay for the Capital Replacement Program and that the City needed to
catch up to maintain infrastructure. She noted that the slide showed the actual dollars and that
there was an inflation influence.  
Mayor Kou asked what the rate increase would be per residential customer. 
Senior Resources Planner Bilir answered that the monthly charge would be about $ 48 per
residential customer.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired if the wastewater plant was shared with other cities and if the
operational and capital costs were split according to usage. He discussed neighboring cities
growing more than Palo Alto and Palo Alto paying more relative to usage, and he thought
capital costs should be split.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Senior Resources Planner Bilir replied that the collection system sent wastewater to the shared
treatment plant and the operational costs were split according to usage. She explained that the
capital costs were split differently depending on the project, and a study was being done to
look at that.  
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston noted that a debt financed capital project was a fixed
allocation with partner agencies, which they were preparing to study in their Long Range
Facilities Plan update to look at other potential models. They planned to do an RFP for the
study, and the work would take place over FY2023 and FY2024. He did not yet have a schedule
for recommendations to Council.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted the study to be done as quickly as possible.  
Senior Resources Planner Bilir discussed dark fiber and stormwater management fee increases. 
She mentioned that the Finance Committee unanimously recommended approval of the
stormwater management fee increase. She provided a slide overviewing all the rate increases, 
including the electric and gas increases already approved by Council. She declared that the
overall impact on the residential median bill for FY2024 would be 3% or $11.  
Mayor Kou asked what EDF was the acronym for related to dark fiber.  
Senior Resources Planner Bilir did not know what E represented, but DF was dark fiber.  
Public Hearing opened at 7:11 P.M.  
Interim City Clerk Mahealani Ah Yun announced there were no requests to speak on
wastewater collection or water rates. She advised the public that this was the last opportunity
to submit protests related to rates. She closed the public hearing on wastewater collection and
water rates. She declared that there were three written protests for wastewater rates.  
City Attorney Stump announced that Council could discuss and take action on the rate this
evening.  
Interim City Clerk Yun noted there were three protests for the water rates.  
City Attorney Stump declared that Council could proceed with this item this evening. She
explained why this process was occurring for these rates but not the other two rates.  
Mayor Kou clarified that Council would consider the resolution to adopt wastewater collection
and water rate increases.  
Council Member Tanaka asked that the vote be split and voiced why he did not support
Number 1. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lauing to adopt the
following for the Wastewater Collection Utility, a Resolution: 
a. Approving the Fiscal Year 2024 Wastewater Collection Financial Plan, including a
9% wastewater rate increase; and
b. Approving a transfer of up to $3.178 million from the Capital Improvement
Projects Reserve to the Operations Reserve in FY 2023; and
c. Approving a transfer of up to $342 thousand from the Rate Stabilization Reserve
to the Operations Reserve in FY 2023; and
d. Increasing the Wastewater Collection Utility Rates via the Amendment of Rate
Schedules S-1 (Residential Wastewater Collection and Disposal), S-2 (Commercial
Wastewater Collection and Disposal), S-6 (Restaurant Wastewater Collection and
Disposal) and S-7 (Commercial Wastewater Collection and Disposal – Industrial
Discharger) 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lauing to adopt the
following for the Water Utility, a Resolution: 
e. Approving the FY 2024 Water Utility Financial Plan, including a 2% water
distribution rate increase; and
f. Approving a transfer of up to $3.746 million from the Capital Improvement
Program (CIP) Reserve to the Operations Reserve in FY 2023; and
g. Approving a transfer of up to $3.0 million from the Rate Stabilization Reserve to
the Operations Reserve in FY 2023; and
h. Increasing Water Utility Rates via the Amendment of Rate Schedules W-1
General Residential Water service), W-2 (Water Service from Fire Hydrants), W3
Fire Service Connections), W-4 (Residential Master-Metered and General Non-
Residential Water Service), and W-7 (Non-Residential Irrigation Water Service) 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
MOTION: Mayor Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to adopt the following: 
1. A Resolution Amending Utility Rate Schedules EDF-1 and EDF-2 to increase Dark Fiber
Rates 4.9 percent, and amending Schedule EDF-3 to reflect minor edits with no rate
change; 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
2. A Resolution
Amending
Utility
Rate
Schedule
D-1 increasing
the Storm
Water
Management Fee by 4.9 percent consistent with the applicable Consumer Price Index. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
Public Hearing closed at 7:22 P.M. 
29. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of the Budget Ordinance for Fiscal Year 2024, Including the
Operating and Capital Budgets, Table of Organization, and Municipal Fee Schedule; 
Acceptance of Updates to the Capital Improvement Plan, and Acceptance of Updates to
the Salary Schedule for the Management and Professionals Group; CEQA Status – Not a
Project
Public Hearing opened at 7:23 P.M. 
Assistant City Manager Kiely Nose appreciated Council, staff, and the community for their
participation in this item.  
Budget Manager Paul Harper supplied slides and noted that they were before Council to finalize
the adoption of the FY2024 budget, which included the operating and capital budgets and the
municipal fee schedule. He indicated the budget represented a pivot point from the pandemic
recovery to a steadier state of operations for the City, which enhanced City services and added
resources for critical needs. He shared a slide summarizing the FY2024 budget in comparison to
prior years and slides showing the Finance Committee’ s recommended
adjustments. He
provided tables showing revenue and expenditure changes for Council priority areas and a slide
representing additional recommended adjustments, which he detailed. He outlined that there
were two potential referrals to staff that needed a Council vote to allow staff to work on them
and then return to Council. He presented and detailed the draft motion for Council’ s
consideration. He outlined the order of proceedings for the item since Council Member
Veenker would recuse herself from the discussion related to Attachment C of the Memo, 
Packet Page 902.  
Council Member Burt, Finance Committee Chair, asked if Packet Page 820 contained all the
Finance Committee’ s recommendations.   
Budget Manager Harper believed all the recommendations were summarized on Packet Page
820, although the funding level of Project HomeKey needed to be discussed.  
Council Member Veenker believed there had been a recommendation for 50% for T2 full EV
fleet replacement, which was now zeroed out. She asked for clarification of the $900K that was
still in the budget. She queried if there was an insurance component with respect to the
Mitchell Park Library repair.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Budget Manager Harper confirmed that there had been a recommendation for 50% for T2 full
EV fleet replacement, which was now zeroed out. He expressed that the $ 900K could be
thought of as the cost that would be borne in the other funds, not the General Fund. He
explained that it was not part of the budget.  
Assistant City Manager Nose clarified that this did not mean there would be no replacement of
fleet EVs but would move all replacements to EV, including heavy equipment. The budget
contemplated truck replacement. There would be a pullback of the 100% EV level related to
heavy equipment not common in the EV world, but it would be revisited midyear. They were
prioritizing EV purchases over ICE vehicles. As for as an insurance component with respect to
the Mitchell Park Library repair, she did not know the exact status of this specific instance, but
the City would always pursue subrogation revenues; however, in the absence of that being
resolved, they wanted to bring forward the budget action to ensure that improvements would
move forward.  
Council Member Burt questioned if the life of internal combustion heavy-duty vehicles would
be extended in anticipation of a more mature EV market in the next couple years and if no
additional internal combustion engine vehicles would be purchased. 
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston confirmed that internal combustion heavy-duty vehicles
would be extended in anticipation of a more mature EV market and that no additional internal
combustion engine vehicles would be purchased. He discussed the replacement program for
smaller, medium, and heavy-duty vehicles, which he expected to increase over time.  
Council Member Tanaka did not believe more management was needed but that there should
be growth of employees who served the public. He discussed salary raises and thought raises
should be awarded to high performers. His concern with the budget was expenses growing
faster than revenue.  
Mayor Kou asked which department the Assistant Director of Sustainability and Climate Action
would report to. She inquired if the extra $ 150K to HSRAP had been dedicated and if any
portion would go toward Ada’s Café. 
Assistant City Manager Nose answered that the Assistant Director of Sustainability and Climate
Action would report to Public Works.  
Budget Manager
Harper believed there was a plan for allocating
the extra $ 150K if
appropriated. There was a report referenced in the Memo.  
Community Services Director Kristen O’Kane confirmed that the HRC did additional allocations
assuming Council would allocate more funding. There was an allocation, though not the full
amount requested, to Ada’s, which would be distributed for FY2024. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked if the HRC’s recommendations for HSRAP allocations
needed to come before Council and if Council would have an opportunity to discuss the
suitability of the allocations. She was concerned that the allocations to Ada’s was low.  
Community Services Director O’Kane did not know if the additional allocations needed to go to
Council, and she directed the question to Human Services Manager Minka Van Der Zwaag. She
noted that the original $6K allocation to Ada’s had been increased to $10K.  
Council Member Burt discussed the value of Ada’s and shared his concerns regarding the
allocation. If HRC had already made their allocations, he understood that the HRC could be
asked to redirect the same dollars or additional funding could be pursued and a request made
to HRC or Council to add it as a specific line item. He inquired if there was a breakdown of
Utility staffing increases versus 2020 actuals compared to General Fund increases. 
Budget Manager Harper expressed that a breakdown of Utility staffing increases versus 2020
actuals compared to General Fund increases should be in the Table of Organization, but they
could [inaudible].  
Council Member Lauing inquired, regarding HSRAP, if the $150K was an incremental allocation
over the original allocation and if was separate from what staff wanted direction on in terms of
a new way forward on HSRAP and whether it should be a percentage. He asked the total of the
original allocation. 
It was confirmed that the $150K was an incremental allocation over the original allocation. 
Council Member Burt acknowledged that the 150K incremental allocation was separate from
what staff wanted direction on in terms of a new way forward on HSRAP; however, they were
related.  
It was stated the original allocation was $50K. The total allocation was $200K.  
Mayor Kou asked if the future formula for HSRAP had been referred to the Finance Committee. 
Council Member Burt asked how the referral was done related to the future formula for HSRAP
funding.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims thought it had been referred to P& S. 
Assistant City Manager Nose did not know if it had been referred to a specific body, but staff
could address it if Council were to make a referral.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Assistant City Manager Nose asked Human Services Manager Van Der Zwaag if the additional
HSRAP allocations had been approved or if it would be brought to Council in a separate action
item and within the $200K of additional allocation how much was allocated to Ada’s.  
Human Services Manager Minka Van Der Zwaag discussed being in unchartered territory with
the Contingency Plan. The HRC had made recommendations for the additional allocations. She
asked Finance staff or Council to let her know if that needed to be a separate action. She noted
that the current allocations without the increased amounts were in the proposed Operating
Budget for FY2024. Ada’s would receive $ 10K. She noted of the 25 grantees that 6 grantees
would receive $10K or less. She discussed starter grants of $5K.  
Mayor Kou asked how much Ada’s had requested.  
Human Services Manager Van Der Zwaag answered that Ada’s had requested $75K.  
City Manager Ed Shikada suggested staff bring the specific recommendations to Council to give
the HRC a chance to report their process and the basis for their recommendations.  
Mayor Kou agreed with City Manager
Shikada, which would allow
discussion
of the
recommendation.  
Council Member Burt asked if there were other options and discussed the dilemma with locking
the dollar amount in the budget. 
Assistant City Manager Nose believed the current recommendation from the HRC chose to
reallocate within the $200K. It could also be chosen that funding be added from the Budget
Stabilization Reserve at any time. The funds did not need to be put aside now. It was always the
Council’ s discretion to reallocate from the BSR.  
Council Member Veenker referenced Packet Pages 824 and 225, capital project adjustments
with the Mitchell Park Library repair and the adjustment to FTTP, and it appeared as though
there would be a $7M surplus, and she questioned how that would impact budget flexibility. 
She had suggestions for allocations, which she would address later.  
Budget Manager Harper answered that the two funds did not comingle. To answer Council
Member Burt’s question about additions to staffing, about 55% had been in the Utilities
Department from FY2020-2024.  
Public Comment
Justine Burt, Executive Director of PATMA, discussed their work in relation to essential workers, 
traffic congestion, parking demand, equity issues, GHG, free train and bus passes, and Bike Love
and refurbished bikes. She appreciated the City supporting PATMA’ s programs.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Ken Horowitz implied that General Fund and the Infrastructure Fund was being mingled. He
requested the infrastructure fund be built up, as it would be essential in starting the community
center at Cubberley. He asked that there be an audit of all funds related to Cubberley. He
suggested not replacing the HVAC system or the synthetic turf for the Cubberley fields right
away and instead waiting to see what would happen with the PAUSD lease, etc.  
Aram James ( Zoom) asked what percentage of the overall budget was allocated to law
enforcement each year and if there was a PERT member and, if so, the PERT member’ s wages. 
He suggested hiring psychiatric social workers. He did not support increasing management
salaries and requested salaries be frozen.  
Mayor Kou inquired if questions from the public could be answered. She questioned what
percent of the budget went to law enforcement; if the cost for the Public Safety building was
still within the budget; and if anyone had been hired for PERT. 
Assistant City Manager Nose noted questions could be asked to the extent that Council had
questions and staff would do their best to respond.  
Budget Manager Harper answered that 18.5% of the General Fund was going to the Police
Department. 
City Manager Shikada noted the percentage going to the Police Department was low among
cities. 
Assistant City Manager Nose voiced that the number Budget Manager Harper quoted was the
Operating Budget and that the Capital Budget would be in addition to that. The Public Safety
building was a significant undertaking, but Council did issue debt financing for it, and it was
within all the appropriations in the FY2024 Operating and Capital Budget.  
Police Chief Andrew Binder remarked that they had retained the officer of PERT, and there
needed to be pairing with a clinician, which would move forward once the budget was finalized.  
City Manager Shikada added that the clinician would be an employee of Santa Clara County.  
Mayor Kou asked if the funds pertaining to Cubberley should be audited or if staff should have
a clearer list.  
Assistant City Manager Nose recommended staff provide a clearer picture of Cubberley funds.  
City Attorney Molly Stump addressed Council Member Veenker’ s recusal and declared that the
budget conversation would be divided into two parts and that items related to the recusal
would be addressed first and then the recused Council member would return for the rest of the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
discussion, and all could vote on the final item. She noted that the nature of Council Member
Veenker’ s recusal was noted in the Staff Report.  
Veenker recused for Stanford related items. 
City Attorney Stump announced that Council would focus on Attachment C, Packet Page 902, 
Staff Report Page 91. 
Assistant City Manager Nose remarked that staff did not have a presentation. If the Council had
discussion, questions, or modifications
on the attachment, it should be discussed and
agreement found now.  
Council Member Tanaka asked how many riders Palo Alto Link had and how much it had cost to
this point.  
Chief Transportation Officer Philip Kamhi answered that, based on early information, they were
on track to surpass ridership of the final year of operating the cross-town shuttle. He would
have to return with information related to the cost. He noted it was a grant-funded project.  
City Manager Shikada clarified that Transportation staff was working on a routine reporting
cycle, which he would share as soon as it was available.  
Mayor Kou asked, regarding the Fire Training facility replacement, if there had been discussion
with Stanford related to updating their site or if Fire had another location in mind.   
Assistant City Manager Nose specified there would be a study related to the Fire Training
facility replacement. It had been made clear to staff that Stanford may look at alternative
purposes on their campus, so staff wanted to be prepared, and the study would help identify
locations, needs, etc.  
Mayor Kou invited Council Member Veenker back to the meeting.  
Council Member Veenker spoke about the Sea Level Rise Adaptation Plan that had been
removed and wanted to know if $100K could be taken from S/ CAP studies (with the funds being
put back at the midyear review) and applied to the Sea Level Rise Adaptation Plan with the
thought that it would be done in the second half of FY2024.  
Public Works Director Eggleston expected to get funding and begin work on the Sea Level Rise
Adaptation Plan in the second half of FY2024. They were working with Valley Water and
hopefully the Corps of Engineers to get more information and to plan a community meeting
that would happen either late summer or early fall 2023. Pulling money from S/ CAP studies
made him nervous, as that work was supporting the 80 x 30 goal, which was on a much tighter
time frame than sea level rise adaptations. It was feasible to take funds from S/ CAP with the
funds being put back at the midyear review. He noted that the $600K was an estimate, that
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
there would be a request for proposals to review and the numbers could be different. He
thought sea level rise was a critical part of S/ CAP that needed funding, and he would push for
midyear funding.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims reported, on behalf of the Finance Committee, that they were
not deprioritizing youth mental health programs by removing the $200K allocation. They had
learned from Director O’Kane that the $200K request was a placeholder and that it was not
attached to a specific program or priority. They hoped to get specific youth mental health
programs to tie dollars to. 
Council Member Lauing noted that the Budget Ordinance would return in January, which would
allow for adjustments. He noted that once-in-a-lifetime/ generation investments were being
made that had to be done. He thought housing was underfinanced, which was okay for now, 
but it needed to be revisited and invested in accordingly. He was happy with the budget and
supported it. 
Council Member Tanaka asked the status of the funding for Pope-Chaucer Bridge. Due to past
flooding in the area, he wanted to make sure the project would be funded.  
City Manager Shikada answered that the Pope-Chaucer Bridge was not funded by the City. It
was led by the San Francisquito Creek Joint Powers Authority and was in conjunction with the
Reach 2 improvements and there was a funding plan yet to be finalized. The City could not
assume zero responsibility related to funding. There was not a need to budget for it in the
upcoming fiscal year. He stated the City’s priority, as it related to the San Francisquito Creek
capital improvements, was the replacement of the Newell Road Bridge among multiple projects
related to the segment between 101 Freeway and Middlefield Road. Within the proposed
budget was a funding allocation for the Newell Road Bridge and was the priority to address
flooding. He noted that Newell and Pope-Chaucer were multiagency
projects with the
immediate priority being Newell Road Bridge. Pope-Chaucer was the topic of an involved
discussion with the Joint Powers Authority agencies, which there was not a specific date other
than general planning dates as work would proceed. The ongoing work with the other agencies
could proceed with Palo Alto allocating funds in the upcoming fiscal year budget.  
Vice Mayor Stone provided an update related to the last JPA meeting and the studies
concerning to the Pope-Chaucer bridge, and the discussion needed to be reopened as a JPA and
possible changes to Reach 2 discussed. Communications would be forthcoming, and meetings
would happen over the next several months. 
Mayor Kou questioned if the light pollution issue had been moved to midyear. 
Budget Manager Harper believed light pollution was funded as part of the budget.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Assistant City Manager Nose believed light pollution was included in the bird-safe glass and
wildlife protection project.  
Planning Director Jonathan Lait believed the budget proposal included the light pollution
request.  
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to: 
1. Adopt the Fiscal Year 2024 Budget Ordinance which includes the Operating and Capital
Budgets, Table of Organization, and Municipal Fee Schedule, as amended by actions
outlined in this report; and
2. Accept the FY 2024-2028 Capital Improvement Plan as amended by the actions outlined
in this report; and
3. Adopt
the
amended
salary
schedule
for
the
Management, 
Professionals
and
Confidential Group; and
4. Refer staff follow-up on the below items recommended by the Finance Committee: 
a. HSRAP Funding
b. Eucalyptus Tree Removal Study
Council Member Burt spoke of the budget returning services to prior levels and addressing key
forward-looking needs.  
Mayor Kou thanked staff and the Finance Committee for their work.  
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no
Public Hearing closed at 8:35 P.M. 
The Council took a 15-minute break] 
Consent Calendar
30. 
Adoption of a Resolution Proposing the Appropriations Limit for Fiscal Year 2024
31. 
Approval of an Agreement Between Santa Clara Valley Water District and the City of
Palo Alto for Administration and Funding of Water Conservation and Stormwater Rebate
Programs and Advanced Metering Infrastructure for a Total Not-To-Exceed Amount of
1,575,000 Over a Seven-Year Term Ending June 30, 2030 ( This is not a project and
therefore is exempt from California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)) 
32. 
Approval of a Blanket Purchase Order with Graniterock Company for the purchase of
Sand, Rock, and Cutback-Cold Mix Asphalt Materials for the Public Works and Utilities
Departments for a three-year term ending June 30, 2026; CEQA – Not a ProjectX
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
33. 
Approval of Contract No. C23187298A
with MuniServices, LLC for Tax and Fee
Consulting Services in a Total Not-To-Exceed Amount of $1,161,550 Over a Five-Year
Term and Contract No. C23187298B with HdL Coren & Cone for Property Tax Consulting
Services in a Total Not-To-Exceed Amount of $111,800 Over a Five-Year Term; CEQA
Status – Not a Project
34. 
Approval of Professional Services Contract with Kittelson & Associates for a Not-to-
Exceed Amount of $333,945 for the Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation Plan Update
35. 
Approve and Authorize the City Manager to Execute a Grant Agreement with the
Federal Highway Administration ( FHWA) to Develop the Palo Alto Safe Streets for All
SS4A) Action Plan by Receiving $ 160,000 in Federal Funds and Requiring $40,000 in City
Matching Funds over Two Years and Approve a FY 2024 Budget Amendment in the
Capital Improvement Fund; CEQA status – not a project. 
36. 
Approval of Contract Number C23187284 with Michael Baker International ( MBI) for a
Not-to Exceed Amount of $211,310 to Provide Administration and Consulting Services
for the City’s Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program for a Term of Two-
years Through June 2025
37. 
Approval of Amendment No. 1 to the Lease Agreement between the Palo Alto Unified
School District ( PAUSD) ( Landlord) and the City of Palo Alto (Tenant) for Extended Day
Care Spaces for an Initial 12-Month Term, Rent Not to Exceed $ 707,676 per Year; CEQA
Status – Not a Project
38. 
Approval of a Professional
Services Agreement ( Contract No. C23184669A) with
LifeMoves for the provision of Homeless Outreach Services in an Amount Not to Exceed
of $460,000 for a term of two years; CEQA status – not a project. 
39. 
Acceptance of an Outdoor Environmental Education Facilities Grant from the California
Department of Parks and Recreation in the amount of One Hundred and Sixty-Two
Thousand Dollars ($ 162,000) for Signage and Exhibits at the Palo Alto Baylands Nature
Preserve, Approval of Deed Restrictions in the Baylands, and Approval of a FY 2024
Budget Amendment in the Capital Improvement Fund; CEQA – categorically exempt
Regulation 15311). 
40. 
Approval of Contract with Downtown Streets Team, Inc. (C23188369) for a Total Not-to-
Exceed Amount of $168,340 for Fiscal Year 2024 for Workforce Development Services: 
Environmental
Assessment: Exempt in Accordance with CEQA Guidelines
Section
15061(b)(3). 
Public Comment
Aram James spoke of the Consent Calendar containing many items and referenced an article in
the Daily Post by Rebecca Eisenberg.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 21 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Chris Richardson, Chief Program Officer for Downtown Streets Team, addressed funding, 
homelessness, and employment and thanked City staff and the Planning Department for their
help over the transitioning funding period and allowing the Team to continue their work.  
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 33, 36, 38. 
MOTION: Mayor Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to approve Agenda Item
Numbers 30-40. 
MOTION PASSED 30-32, 34-35, 37, 39-40: 7-0
MOTION PASSED 33, 36, 38: 6-1, Tanaka no
Council Member Tanaka addressed his no votes. He stated he did not support Item 33 as it was
more money for the business tax, which he did not originally support. Regarding Item 36, the
bid amounts did not make sense to him, and he noted that the more spent on analysis meant
less for the people needing it. He remarked that Item 38 was consistent with his prior vote on
LiveMoves. He noted there were 800 pages in the packet and many consent items and that
questions had been submitted to the City Manager, which he had not received answers to. He
announced that he would not approve a contract if the contract was not included the packet. 
Study Session
41. 
Tree Protection Ordinance Year One Implementation Update
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston noted that after the first year of implementation staff was
to review the ordinance implementation with PTC and PRC and return to Council with any
recommended adjustments. He indicated that the implementation of the ordinance had been
somewhat interrupted by last winter’s storms. They intended to go to PTC and PRC in late
summer or fall to follow up with them.   
Manager Urban Forestry Peter Gollinger supplied slides related to the timeline of the review
process in place and summarized the key changes included in the ordinance that related to an
expanded definition of protected trees, allowable reasons for removal of protected trees, and
maintenance of private protected trees, and there had been major revisions to the notification
and appeals process. He provided a list of protected species under the updated ordinance, 
which was estimated to be about 224,000 trees. He discussed data they collected in the first 10
months of the ordinance. A key update was maintenance notification, which he outlined. He
discussed the noticing system and the completed outreach efforts. He spoke of the 2023
unprecedented winter storms. He provided data related emergency tree removal permits, limb
failures, city tree removals, tree-related electric outages, and green debris removed, which he
compared to 2022. He detailed upcoming outreach efforts.  
Public Comment
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 22 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Bob Sanner opined that the Palo Alto ordinance did not comply with State law, which could
mean legal fees and litigation, and he did not believe the City was being nontransparent with
residents and that it would be more difficult to take down trees in Palo Alto. 
Karen Holman (Zoom) speaking on behalf of Terry Holzmer, Bob Philips, Andie Reed, and Hank
Sousa spoke on behalf of Tom DuBois and read a letter from him that stated there was a
misunderstanding of the ordinance, that severe weather needed to be in perspective and not
be justification to weaken a reasonable ordinance, that the implementation of the ordinance
was minimal, and that smaller diameter trees needed to be protected. She read a letter into the
record that she was asked to do by the Canopy Board, which related to their support of the
updated ordinance, and they looked forward to continuing to partner with the City as
implementation
of the ordinance
continued. She thanked
staff and Council for their
commitment to the canopy.  
John Kelley explained why he urged Council to undue the ordinance. He indicated the canopy
had been growing in the past and asked why this ordinance was done. He did not believe Palo
Alto should compare themselves to other jurisdictions. He calculated that each permitted tree
removal would cost the City $10K a tree. He claimed that the ordinance did not comply with
State law regarding statewide exemption ADUs.  
Leah Russin spoke of the ordinance impacting her and her family in a negative way. She asked
for flexibility in implementing the ordinance or that it be rescinded. She would submit her
written comment.  
Jeff Greenfield, Chair of PRC, liaison to the Urban Forestry within PRC, and advisor for Canopy, 
spoke primarily on his own behalf and commented that the updated ordinance was a result of a
comprehensive review and would result in a broad range of benefits. He noted that the process
would include adjustments to the ordinance and that the item would go before PRC. He looked
forward to returning later in the year to further discuss the Title 9 Tree Ordinance update.  
Aram James ( Zoom) agreed with the positions of Bob Sanner and John Kelley. He opined that
that one representing themselves as a private citizen and as part of a committee seemed to be
a conflict. He discussed the arborists concluding that certain trees were healthy, yet fell during
the storms. He claimed that State and Federal law occupied City territory.  
Winter Dellenbach wished for protection of more trees. She requested the City educate tree
owners to preventatively care for their trees, and information could be found on the Urban
Forestry website and Canopy’ s website. She recommended the City provide an insert in utility
bills or direct mail and email to alert residents to needed preventative care maintenance and
that the City sponsor a community workshop with Urban Forestry and Canopy to discuss the
new ordinance.  
Council Member Lauing questioned when the new Tree Permit Workflow would be active. He
stated that “ no decisions rendered” on Packet Page 755 indicated that a decision had been
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 23 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
rendered. He noted that the core issue seemed to be educating residents and thought a letter
or a flier was needed instead of just a postcard.  
Manager Urban Forestry Gollinger commented that the new Tree Permit Workflow should be
live next week. He noted that that Packet Page 755 had a bullet error, and he provided details
related to the denials.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims discussed the intersection of the Tree Ordinance and the
Housing Element. When the item returned to Council in the fall, she requested there be data
reflecting the impact of the ordinance on request for housing permits. She inquired if there was
a way to replace a removed tree with two to five trees in areas of the city without trees where
housing was planned.   
Council Member Burt was struck by the number of protected trees under the old ordinance
versus the new ordinance, which he calculated to be about nine trees per household. He
inquired how the notification for maintenance standard would be applied to City contracted
street tree maintenance. He thought there was a disconnect between contractural standards
and the way trees were trimmed and was interested in better compliance. He requested staff
provide insights related to the State Code 3497 requirement addressed by the public and asked
if it was referenced in the ordinance and, if not referenced, why it was not referenced. He
queried if State law would prevail in terms of that definition or if the City could establish a
definition. Going forward, he wanted to consider adjustments to the ordinance.  
Manager Urban Forestry Gollinger declared that best practice standards were included in the
tree maintenance contracts, and the standards had been a requirement for years. He recalled
that State Code 3497 was language in the State’s definition of nuisance, and he did not think it
was specific to trees, although others had applied it to trees. Regarding the ordinance not
referencing the code, he understood that the ordinance was more stringent by design than the
code language allowed.  
City Attorney Molly Stump recalled that State Code 3497 was considered when the issue was
raised. She did not recall the details and could not currently respond without the Section
number. She was confident that the content of the proposal was reviewed to ensure they were
enforceable at the local and State level.  
Council Member Veenker spoke of the canopy increasing before the ordinance had been
passed and wondered if it was passed with the intent that there be a balance with the planned
housing builds. She encouraged being pro tree and pro housing and hoped that would be
considered on coming back to Council. She requested staff think about canopy equivalents, 
which she explained. She remarked that the standards to remove trees needed to be
investigated.  
Council Member Tanaka requested that a member of the public be allowed to speak again. He
asked if in the event the City refused to allow a tree to be removed and if the tree then should
fall if the City would have liability. He asked why the fees for tree removal permits were $457, 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 24 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
which he opined was high, and asked what would happen if a person could not afford it. He
thought the City should be gracious in issuing permits for hazardous trees and that the process
should be easier and streamlined. He asked how long it took to get a permit. He thought
waiting for an arborist to respond placed liability on the City, and he looked forward to the City
Attorney’ s analysis related to this.  
Mayor Kou denied the request for a member of the public to speak again.  
City Attorney Stump indicated, regarding City liability, that advice was generally not provided
based on generalized hypotheticals. She requested to be allowed to look at the records and to
then advise on the issue, so on coming back to Council, she would provide an answer.  
Manager Urban Forestry Gollinger broke down the cost of the tree removal permits. If a person
could not afford the permit, he explained that the City could work with residents, and he
declared that no-fee permits had been issued for dead trees, but it was on a case-by-case basis. 
He expressed that there was a process for removing trees posing an imminent hazard, which
would be reviewed by an arborist. He noted that obtaining a permit took a couple weeks; 
however, if there was an imminent hazard, an immediate permit would be issued.  
City Manager Ed Shikada commented that if there was an imminent safety issue that staff
would address it on a case-by-case basis.  
Vice Mayor Stone spoke of the data comparisons for 2023 and 2022 being dissimilar. He asked
if there was an estimate of the limb failures or tree-related electric outages that could have
been caused by the updated tree ordinance. He discussed the ordinance being meant to move
Palo Alto to the median in the region. He spoke of the tree canopy and reaching S/ CAP goals. 
He addressed an article published by Penn State concerning trees being the best carbon
capture technology. He spoke of older trees being replaced by younger or multiple trees and
noted that there were reports from the U.S. Geological Survey stating older trees sequestered
more carbon than young trees and that cutting down older trees released carbon into the air, 
and he was interested in hearing PTC’s thoughts on the issue. He stated that the ordinance was
not yet completely implemented, that PTC and PRC needed to contribute further and
refinements were needed.  
Manager Urban Forestry Gollinger did not think the updated ordinance influenced the limb
failures, etc.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims spoke of a Berkeley study that indicated urban infill was the
greatest lever to reduce GHG emissions, and she did not think the housing infill goals should be
shortchanged by prioritizing trees over infill in every instance. On return to Council in the fall, 
she wanted to see data comparing Palo Alto’s protection efforts with surrounding cities and
data related to the growth of the City’s tree canopy over time. She asked if staff could return to
Council with information related to those who had been persuaded to not seek a permit, as she
thought it was important to know the number of such interactions.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 25 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Council Member Veenker spoke of canopy equivalency and wanted to learn more from experts.  
Mayor Kou voiced that the canopy needed to be a part of the solution to climate change and
sequestration and would be needed to help meet the 2030 Sustainability Climate Action Plan. 
She noted that the Climate Action Plan included increasing the tree canopy. She hoped staff
would return to Council with data reflecting the amount of carbon sequestered and, if it could
be calculated, the amount of potential oxygen release from different maturities and sizes of
trees.  
Council Member Burt did not think any Council member was advocating for radical departures
from the ordinance and thought all supported growth of the canopy. He proposed there be a
greater focus on the heritage trees. He thought tradeoffs or other goals related to this
ordinance needed to be considered. He believed there needed to be a balance of specifically
identifying a tree hazard and a perspective tree hazard that could not be determined. He
questioned if there should be a differentiation between trees in backyards versus front yards. 
He noted that the quantitative numbers of the increasing canopy were a value, but he was not
wedded to placing all 15-inch diameter trees in a protected status, and he would rather rebuild
a canopy that reflected a natural ecosystem.  
NO ACTION
Action Items
AA1.  Colleagues Memo: Approval of a “Friendship City” Program
Council Member Veenker questioned the process for creating a Friendship City and who would
be involved. She proposed that it come to Council.  
Mayor Kou thought alternatives for approval could be investigated.  
Council Member Burt noted that Council was trying to streamline the process, but there was an
alternative. He asked if a Colleagues’ Memo would come to Council as an action item or as
consent. He proposed going through a Colleagues’ Memo. He spoke of the differences of a
Friendship City and a Sister City and the intended purposes of this item. He agreed with the
alternative process.  
City Attorney Stump explained why she did not think a Colleagues’ Memo could come to
Council as consent.  
Public Comment
Sarah Burgess, President of Neighbors Abroad, spoke of Sister City relationships being broad
and benefitting the City. They would like to be able to select from those seeking to be a Sister
City but that there be a simpler method to do it.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 26 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
Interim City Clerk Mahealani Ah Yun announced that Sarah Burgess had reached her speaking
time of three minutes.  
Council Member Burt asked if Sarah Burgess could continue speaking.  
Mayor Kou invited Sarah Burgess to continue speaking. 
Sarah Burgess voiced that they wanted a dedicated committee in place to run the relationship
and a contract for the relationship setting forth simple and limited goals, so it would not be the
broad relationship, and they wanted the three-year duration, which could be extended or
morphed into a traditional Sister City relationship. They could not take on cities to the degree
they had in the past, but they did not want to turn down cities in the offing.  
Aram James ( Zoom) noted that the last speaker received 4 minutes and 30 seconds to speak, 
which he did not find fair. He spoke of his past experience as an exchange student in the former
Soviet Union. He wanted to there to be a Palestinian Sister City and requested there be a
discussion to address Palestinian rights.  
Council Member Lauing thought items on Page 909 needed to be arranged and asked how this
item should be processed – if the Colleagues’ Memo recommendation should be revised or if it
should go to P& S.  
Council Member Burt stated there were two alternatives, which included referring it to P& S
with guidance from Council.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims liked the idea of having a different tier of a City relationship
and the idea of a community member taking responsibility for the relationship and becoming a
Board member of Neighbors Abroad. However, she thought staff was concerned that the
resource impacts could be significant, and she wanted to be respectful of their concerns. If this
were to go to P& S, they would review staffing impacts. She thought this could be a stepping
stone to there being more staff presence around the issue.  
Council Member Tanaka thought it was good to learn more about others and best practices. He
wondered if there was time to maintain the current Sibling City and Sister City relationships and
questioned if more could be taken on with City resources, staff time, and funding. He supported
the idea but did not support there being additional staff time or funding.  
Council Member
Burt explained
that he wanted to be judicious in adding additional
relationships. He discussed City resources, Neighbors Abroad, events, sharing best practices, 
diversity objectives, community involvement, and economic development relationships. He
stated that P& S may need to look at moving this forward, but he noted Neighbors Abroad had
the same concern.  
Mayor Kou believed that different cities wanting a relationship with Palo Alto needed to be
recognized and acknowledged, but she knew that Neighbors Abroad worked hard to ensure
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 27 of 27
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 19/2023
that a relationship would be maintained. She noted that a number of mayors had contacted
Palo Alto with interest. She hoped that developing a Sister City relationship could be moved
forward and that it be sent to P& S. She noted that Dunderry, Ireland, wanted to be a Friendship
City, and she hoped this could progress to giving them an answer.  
Council Member Burt noted that in each case they were not looking to do a Friendship City, but
there was economic development value.  
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Stone to refer the Colleagues
Memo for Approval of a “Friendship City” Program to Policy and Services Committee for further
discussion and to review the staffing impacts of this program. 
Council Member Tanaka stated he could not support this if there was resource impact to the
City.  
Council Member Burt anticipated there would be a modest resource impact.  
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no
Adjournment
The meeting was adjourned at 10:57 P.M. 
