CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 18
Regular Meeting
December 11, 2023
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka
Present Remotely:  
Absent:   
Veenker
Call to Order
Mayor Kou called the meeting to order. Roll was taken with six present.  
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
None. 
Public Comment
None. 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements
Council Member Burt wanted to share that the MTC will be reviewing the Regional
Transportation Measure at the board meeting in January. Related to that is discussion that has
been part of the polling MTC took and discussion at the board meeting about the prospect of
BART merging with Caltrain but Caltrain is not supportive of this concept. Their local legislators
have all come forward in support of not proceeding with that idea at this time.  
Consent Calendar
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/11/2023
Public Comment: 
1. Gary J. with Acclaim Companies – Item 6 – They are requesting that this item be
removed from the Consent Calendar for further discussion as there are a number of
issues that have yet to be resolved. He outlined the changes they are requesting.     
Vice Mayor Stone asked for discussion of the timeline of January 31 for making changes to the
zoning code for the housing element.  
Ed Shikada, City Manager responded they would not be in a position to hear it that night and
needed to confer with Staff and see if they could bring it back the following week.  
Mayor Kou voted no on Item Number 4 because she was not sure if there would be recovery
costs if there are no licenses and thought it bore a public discussion. She thought extension was
too long on Number 5 and that it should be case by case.  
Mayor Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 4, 5, 6. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims, Council Member Tanaka, Vice Mayor Stone, and Council
Member Lauing requested to pull Agenda Item Number 6 from Consent. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Stone moved, seconded by Mayor Kou to approve Agenda Item Numbers
1-5. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 1-3: 6-0-1, Veenker absent
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 4-5: 5-1-1, Kou no, Veenker absent
1. 
Approval of Minutes from November 27, 2023 Meeting
2. 
Regional Water Quality Control Plant Joint Intercepting Sewer Rehabilitation Project
Phase 1: Approval of Construction
Contract, Construction
Management
Contract
Amendment, and Addendum 12 to the Mountain View, Los Altos, and Palo Alto
Agreement on Project Funding; CEQA status – Exempt under CEQA Guidelines Section
15301 (Repairs to Existing Facilities) 
3. 
Approval of Contract Amendment Number 1 to Contract C23187506 with Momentum
for Health to Extend Term by Eight (8) Months at No Additional Cost to the City, Revise
the Not-to-Exceed
Amount
Down by $ 68,294 to $ 1,931,706 and Compensation
Language, Provide Quarterly Invoicing, and Revise the Schedule of Rates; CEQA Status – 
Not a Project. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/ 11/2023
4. 
Adoption of an Ordinance Amending Chapters 4.10 (Licenses Obtained by Application to
Chief of Police), 4.30 ( Soliciting Funds), and Chapter 4.32 ( Soliciting Information for
Commercial Purposes); and Adding Chapter 4.12 to Title 4 ( Business Licenses and
Regulations) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code to Comply With Updates to the Law, 
Including 2018 Senate Bill 946 (Sidewalk Vendors). CEQA status – categorically exempt. 
5. 
Adoption of an Urgency Ordinance and an Interim Ordinance That Allows the Director of
Planning and Development
Services to Extend Planning Entitlements for Housing
Development Projects up to an Additional 18 Months. Environmental Review: Exempt
from CEQA in Accordance with CEQA Guidelines 15061(b)(3). 
6. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of an Ordinance Implementing Program 1.1A and 1.1B of
the Housing Element, Including: 1) New Chapter 18.14: Housing Incentives, and 2) 
Modifications to Base Zoning Districts Throughout Title 18. Adoption of a Resolution
Making
Corresponding
Changes
to the
Land
Use
and
Design
Element
of the
Comprehensive
Plan. ( FIRST READING: November 13, 2023 PASSED 5-1-1, Kou no, 
Veenker recused and PASSED 6-1, Kou no) 
City Manager Comments
City Manager Ed Shikada provided a slide presentation discussing the first annual test of the
Emergency Alert System for Palo Alto registered phones, Uplift local holiday activities, the
holiday decorating contest, and update on the Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation Plan, the
San Antonio Road Corridor Visioning Workshop and notable tentative upcoming Council items.   
Action Items
7. 
LEGISLATIVE: Adopt Ordinances Amending Planned Community Ordinance 2343 for
2901-2905 Middlefield Road and Establishing a Separate Planned Community Zoning
Designation for 702 Ellsworth Place to Enable the Development of a new Single-Story, 
Single-Family Residence. CEQA Status -- Categorically Exempt Under CEQA Guidelines
Sections 15061(b)(3), 15301, and 15303 (Continued from September 18 and November
6, 2023) 
Chief Planning Official Amy French provided a slide presentation discussing the purpose of the
application, a detailed background, public comments and Staff recommendations. 
Ken Hayes, Hayes Group Architects gave a slide presentation discussing the proposed PC 2343
modifications, development plans, issues with the need for relocation of a utility pole and
proposed revisions. They were requesting that the issuance of the building permit not be
coupled to the resolution and installation of the pole so the owner can get going on his building
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/ 11/2023
permit. He stated at the August 9 PTC Hearing, Commissioner Heckman had pointed out
reasons the project’ s impact would be beneficial.  
Nitin Handa, owner of 702 Ellsworth Place, provided a slide presentation discussing the fence
restrictions and two options of fencing he proposed.    
Public Comment: 
1. 
Paul Bigbee presented a video providing context of the commercial traffic on Ellsworth. 
He urged Council to consider the safety implications of this commercial traffic and keep
PC 2343 intact.  
2. 
Kristen A. Van Fleet speaking on behalf of Robyn Ziegler, Robert Chaoquang Chen, 
Charlie Effinger, Yevgeny Khasin – provided a slide deck on solving the Ellsworth
problems and maintaining safety and circulation in the neighborhood. She discussed
incorrect statements that had been made, problems with the current plan, the
inadequate delivery space, utility pole in proposed delivery truck parking space, 
inadequacy of the new proposed delivery space on Sutter, inadequacy of the planned
Parking Space # 16, the proposed UPS-approved solution, a driveway ramp that works
for the unique conditions on Ellsworth, a demonstration of the need to see the creek
fence/ bend in the sidewalk and a visual obstruction of the blind corner created by the
temporary fence and problems with the proposed fence.  
3. 
Jake Margolis speaking on behalf of Bill Preucel, Gala Beykin, Jessica Sheldon, Jeff
Conrad – continued the slide deck discussing problems with the proposed fence, 
problems exiting Ellsworth Place, need for keeping the easement clear for emergencies, 
a comparison of some other driveways in the neighborhood, tactile paving to sidewalk
on both sides of the street and a summary of proposals for improving the problems on
Ellsworth Place.  
4. 
William Ross speaking on behalf of Chin Chong, On Chong, Tsing Xue, Shan Wang – 
discussed the critical legal concepts in evaluating the PCs before them which he
outlined. He discussed issues that were important in evaluating the decision. He
presented the question of the matter having been presented fairly before the Council. 
He respectfully suggested that the people involved in this transaction know what is
going on in the real estate world. Regarding the issue that there is a taking, he asked
what was taken and if there was substantial evidence in the record to show that. He
respectfully requested a legal analysis of the legal issues.  
5. 
Jeff Levinsky
speaking on behalf of Hamilton
Hitchings, Sheri Furman, Annette
Glanckopf, Carolyn Garbarino – outlined a number of problems with the new proposal
and Staff report. He referenced a drawing in the Public Comments section for this item
under page 3 that is a better approach discussing the benefits. He corrected some of
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/11/2023
what he deemed misunderstandings of the PC. He outlined some of the valuable
benefits the applicant would be getting out of the proposed ordinances. He thought the
Community’ s request for improvement for safety and access was a very modest request.   
6. 
Susan L. recalled a similar discussion with the City in 2013 about the safety of the street
where they were told by City Staff no changes could be made because it was a private
street. The traffic report City Council was given was commissioned by the applicant and
not under the City auspices. She believed with safety being the primary concern, Council
can and should see the issue from the perspective of those who use the road daily and
not just the applicant’ s. She asked for Council’ s support in widening Ellsworth along the
first 111 feet and creating the relevant site triangle allowing for a clear view to
Matadero Creek.  
7. 
Lynn Chiapella (Zoom) commented the City appears to have lost all the records of the PC
developments. She stated Mr. Dewey has not always been a good property manager in
terms of the landscape. She requested that he submit an ARB proposal so that it would
be recorded and he would be responsible for the City park strip in front of 2901.  
Mr. Hayes outlined the actions they have taken to accommodate the neighbor’ s and City’s
concerns.  
Gary Black, Hexagon, said that the loading space proposed by Ms. Van Fleet offers no
advantages in terms of trucks getting in and out.  
Mr. Hayes agreed stating their attorney believes widening Ellsworth further and providing the
loading space on the property would constitute a taking. He requested City Council adopt and
modify the ordinance from those proposed by Staff.   
Mayor Kou could not find Attachment B in the report. She added that 702 Ellsworth Place
should be identified as a parking lot and not an undeveloped or vacant lot.  
Council Member Burt did not believe the parking space on the east side of the apartment
complex would be wide enough for delivery trucks. He wanted clarification on Staff’s position
on moving the pole. He felt the tandem space in the carport looked abnormally narrow and he
had concerns whether it would fit a typical car. He thought the area where the pole is looked
much more practical to be the delivery space.   
Ms. French gave the dimensions of the space and stated Staff agreed that the smaller trucks
would be best parked in that location. She stated the planned Community ordinances contain
the recommendation to adjust the pole. She said they studied the tandem space the applicant
proposed and it is a viable option.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/11/2023
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning, agreed that the tandem space in the carport looked narrow. 
He stated this was a solution that was brought forth as an alternative from the applicant to
address a combination of issues. He added City Council has the authority whether to approve
the tandem configuration as part of the PC. 
Council Member Lauing wondered why the parking space under discussion was needed. He
asked what would be accomplished by the removal of the pole. He did not understand where
the UPS-approved delivery space was located.  
Ms. French responded that it was to address the fact that there are two-bedroom units that
require two parking spaces under the regular zoning code as part of a PC. She said the Council
has the authority to waive that second space for the two-bedroom unit. The pole would only
need to be readjusted if the delivery space is parallel.  
Director Lait showed explained a diagram of the location of the proposed UPS-approved
delivery space.  
Council Member Lauing referenced the comment of one speaker who said CEQA was required
in this regard as well as comments on environmental evidence.  
Chief Assistant City Attorney Caio Arellano responded this had been reviewed for CEQA
compliance and they agreed with Staff report recommendation that the project would be
exempt from CEQA review.  
Vice Mayor Stone asked if the intention of the delivery space in the green box would be for
additional parking space needed for the apartments or reserved for delivery spaces only and
how that would be enforced. He wondered if there would be a way to specify it was reserved
for delivery only during delivery hours and then reserved for overnight guest parking for
members of the Community.  
Director Lait answered it would be reserved for delivery. He pointed out it was parking space 16
and that is where the other parking space would go. He stated they could set some regulations
toward the parking hours. He noted there is some uncertainty in terms of how the
communications pole was established. To relocate it on Mr. Dewey’s property would require an
agreement with that. He also noted they understand there is a bit of objection to incur the cost
of strengthening the one utility pole and adding a new one. He thought Staff may have a
recommendation. He further noted the diagram suggested an additional 12-inch request for
Ellsworth widening. The property of 2901 has already offered 30 inches to widen the Ellsworth
Place private drive. There is no interest in extending that easement further. He added there
may be a cost-sharing opportunity so the property owner of 2901 does not bear the full cost to
relocate and strengthen the poles.  
Council Member Burt thought the cost-sharing on the pole moving was appropriate. He thought
a graded fence with some degree of an angle and a tactile sidewalk would reduce the public
safety risk. He wanted to ask about the driveway ramp setback zone which the residents
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/11/2023
brought forward with a specific reference in the zoning code under the Parking Design Tables
and Figures in Municipal Code 18.54070. He asked if Staff had reviewed this. He stated there
was also an assertion by the neighbors about private street width and asked for Staff to
comment on that.  
Director Lait wanted to flag that there are some rules that come into play about when and
where the tactile surfaces can get placed and they would want to reserve that subject to the
review of the Public Works Director. He added another complication about the situation is that
the private street does not connect from Middlefield to Ellsworth Place but goes via easement
over the 702 Ellsworth property. He noted the applicant had their consultant study this and City
Staff agreed with the consultant’ s statements that having the ramp the way it is slows vehicles
down as they approach the sidewalk.  
Ms. French stated a new subdivision would be required to meet the standard width. She said
they would look at the site distance triangle that talks about the 35-foot distance measured
along the curb at Middlefield. She thought that applied to a ramp on a slope of 22.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims thought that the statement on Packet Page 158 Section 1 Item
F should be amended to remove “ November 6”. She expressed her view that the present
private property owners were not responsible for the errors made by the City in failing to
correctly record things more than 50 years ago. She felt Mr. Handa’s offer of an additional foot
of asphalt to widen Ellsworth in exchange for a 36-inch fence was a win-win. She agreed a 1-
foot fence would not create an adequate barrier between his home and a busy street. She
appreciated that Mr. Dewey did not have to agree to an extension of the easement being
requested. She was in favor of a tactile surface at the sidewalk at the expense of the City. She
would like for the new communications pole to be at the City’s expense. She asked Staff to
explain the recommendation in the ordinance in Section 5 Matter B Logistics Plan $ 5000
deposit to offset the City’s enforcement cost. She did not feel placing that burden on Mr. Handa
was equitable.  
Director Lait responded the cost is intended to recover the Staff time that would be involved in
the Logistics Plan.   
Council Member Lauing brought up that Mr. Handa offered to put a bend in the front of his lot. 
He thought that would resolve the issue and should be considered. He did not think they should
proceed with the issue of one foot of real estate on the apartment side. He felt strongly that
the pole issue is not anybody’ s issue and he favored a split cost at the least.  
Mayor Kou did not agree with the comments made that they made the mistake. She thought
they should have researched how the vacant lot had been missed. She said the application
should have been rejected in the first place. Selling this parcel should have been between the
seller and buyer to remedy the situation. She stated Council has discretionary review over the
PC. She believed eliminating deliveries to the existing residents or inconveniencing delivery
persons would be a taking and would decrease the value of their properties. She wondered
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/11/2023
what kind of precedent they would be setting when asking for amendments on something the
City has done as a PC. She thought they should reject this and let the seller and buyer handle it. 
She agreed there should be something in escrow for complaints that will be levied. She said
that Hexagon based the 24-foot entry on driveways from multifamily construction but they
have a turnaround at the end of the driveway for delivery trucks but this one does not.  
Mr. Handa wanted to understand that the fence was being proposed at 4 feet from the
sidewalk as suggested by the City’s Transportation Department.  
Director Lait confirmed that was correct but the design would require some consideration to
reflect Item Number 2.  
Mr. Hayes stated that his client agreed to the additional 12 inches on the 2901 side.  
Council Member Tanaka asked what the bushes were like that had been cleared where the
fence is being proposed and how much worse or better it is now.  
Ms. French answered there was substantial clearing of vegetation on their fence by the Water
District due to causing obstruction of view and it is much better now.  
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Mayor Kou to approve the staff
recommendation to adopt two ordinances and implement the following: 
1. UPS approved delivery spot plan on Ellsworth that does not affect the footprint of the
house, that provides a useable delivery spot for 10-11 foot wide trucks, maintains safe
road circulation with Middlefield, does not remove public parking on Sutter, and to
relocate the communications pole at a shared expense of the City and the property
owner. 
2. Require graded fencing that would allow visibility line of sight through 2 angles of the
fence that allows adequate transparency of 3-foot fence. 
3. Direct Staff to pursue ADA tactile markers on the sidewalk where it intersects the
Ellsworth Place easement subject to approval by the Director of Public Works at the
City’s expense. 
4. Width of Ellsworth Place at entrance to be 26-feet wide for at least 100-feet from
Middlefield Road. 
5. Parking space #16 can be removed at the discretion of the Planning Director. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Veenker absent
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/11/2023
8. 
Direction to Pursue Development of New Parking and Refined Proposals for Housing in
the University Avenue Downtown and Development Goals for Housing Investment. 
CEQA Status – Not a Project. 
Sunny Tong, Real Property Manager, gave a slide presentation discussing the pursuit of new
parking and housing in University Avenue Downtown to include Staff recommendations, a map
of Downtown parking lots and garages, a background timeline, responses from ALTA Housing
and MidPen Housing, initial parking development concepts, a parking supply and demand
snapshot as of October 5, 2023 of the Downtown parking facilities, initial housing development, 
desired development goals, estimated costs of the project and the next steps. He then went
back over Staff recommendations.  
Assistant
City
Manager
Kiely
Nose
added that
Staff would
recommend
that
Council
acknowledge this is the first time they have had the opportunity to resume discussions of the
parking lot as well as review both RFI proposals that were received as they navigate the
discussion. 
Council Member Burt did not recall the boundary of the Downtown ground floor retail district
and asked if Lot T was in that district and if there were parcels across from it. 
Mayor Kou wanted to know the location of Lot A.  
Mr. Tong answered Lot A is in the coral zone on Emerson and Lytton.  
Vice Mayor Stone asked if the EIR performed on Lot D has expired. He referenced MidPen’ s
plan to have four-story buildings on Packet Page 173 intended to leverage the low-income
housing tax credit program. He wondered why height matters for qualifying for that program. 
He asked for an update on the current plans for Downtown Core Residential Parking Program. 
He wanted to know if they would have the ability to be able to reserve parking spaces within
Lot D if it was a publicly owned parking garage if Lot T was approved for housing and was under
parked. 
Chief Assistant City Attorney Arellano answered the EIR would not expire; however, depending
on the nature of the project, they may have to reevaluate how accurately that analysis would
continue to apply.  
Felix
AuYeung, Vice President
of Business
Development
MidPen
Housing
Corporation, 
responded that in their response to the RFI, they tried to take into consideration the height in
context of the Downtown and suggested four stories might be appropriate. With four stories
and 40 units, that would be the appropriate size for the 9% tax credit program specifically
because there are some allocation limits as to how big a project can be within that competition. 
He did not think that meant they could not do a taller unit with more units but they would have
to shift into the 4% tax credit program.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/ 11/2023
Assistant City Manager Nose stated that the Transportation Team was looking at parking in the
Downtown core whether it be parking permits in the garages or the RPP districts as they are
reevaluating the parking needs and efficiency of how parking is used post COVID. If Council
provides them direction to move forward with affordable housing and/ or the parking, these
would all be part of the variables Staff would take into consideration in the further actions
brought forward to Council.  
Chief Assistant City Attorney Arellano responded that both project concepts contemplate some
level of contribution by the housing development to offsite parking in a City garage. They would
evaluate all of the different parking users for that garage but reserved residential parking would
like be part of that design.  
Council Member Lauing referenced Slide Number 8 on Packet Page 174 showing parking and he
did not see where it was broken down pre and post COVID and what it was attempting to
convey. He wanted to know how free parking after 5:00 would impact this. He asked if
redirection signage was underway. He asked what they liked about Lot D. He wanted to know
the estimated cost for an underground space. He noticed on Packet Page 179 the 400
Middlefield project was underground parking at $52K, which he thought was low. He wanted to
know if they had any specific bills or programs in mind with regard to funding from the State.  
Mr. Tong responded that some of the analysis was done in the Staff report and discussed what
the data on this slide was conveying. He added the data from pre COVID was shown differently
and they thought it would be confusing. They thought the free parking after 5:00 encouraged
people to use parking in Downtown at that time. They thought after 3:00 the data shows
parking demand is similar to pre COVID times.  
Assistant City Manager Nose answered that redirection signage is already underway. She
thought Staff was identifying that it is a multi-pronged approach. She stated that in the Staff
report they identified that the Council recommend they resume the parking looking at Lot D or
other lots. She discussed their methods of choosing the location. She stated most of the parking
space costs they were seeing were blended costs. She thought they would need to go back and
look at the data to isolate the cost of underground only. She said they were acknowledging
Council’ s guidance to Staff to continue to seek grant funding.  
Assistant Director Public Works Holly Boyd said that parking in [inaudible] takes into account
the cost to build the California Avenue Garage.  
Council Member Burt talked about the lack of onsite parking in the proposals for Lot T. He
wanted to see the ratio of the blended costs. He wanted to know if they had the ability to
require parking onsite. He was interested in above-ground, onsite parking as the way to deliver
an affordable project with whatever was the appropriate amount of parking for affordable
projects and in looking at shared use of the parking for Downtown purposes and residents. He
thought the other consideration for reducing demand for parking would be that affordable
housing residents should have transit passes as an automatic, ongoing provision of the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/ 11/2023
Affordable Housing Project. He thought there needed to be discussion looking at how to have
some compatibility of the mass and scale of the building with its surroundings if they allow
greater height.  
Assistant City Manager Nose answered the lack of onsite parking was what Staff was seeking
guidance from Council on. She discussed the variety of proposals which Staff has used to inform
their recommendation.  
Director Lait responded that the idea was that it would be a partnership between the City and
nonprofit so they could set the terms of how they would want it to go.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked if they were trying to circumvent the law that says
parking cannot be required for housing developments within a half mile of transit. She asked if
they would waive the impact fee. She wondered what the articulated constraint would be
about how many parking lots they could do at once. She wanted to hear from ALTA and MidPen
on the height limit.  
City Manager Ed Shikada thought the Staff report referred to basic requirements on what can
be required of a private property development but this is a City property in which they would
be able to negotiate terms of a development. answered that the baseline assumption would be
that impact fees would not be waived but they would become part of the project cost and
would need to be reflected in the balance sheets. He said a key constraint was collective
bandwidth and as the Council wrestles with respect to Lot T, there are a number of dimensions
to be defined that would enable any perspective partner to give them their best proposal and
there is a recognition of existing parking demand as well as future parking demand.  
City Attorney Molly Stump stated they would be joint owners and could make the project that
is right for their Community. 
Carlos Castellanos, Vice President of Real Estate Development Alta Housing, responded that
they were exploring different heights in their proposal. The height they proposed is a typical
building type.  
Mr. AuYeung responded that for the RFI they were in a vacuum deciding what is appropriate for
Downtown. Without the ability to do Community outreach, they did not have a sense of what
the height ought to be. He added that regarding parking, the cost per stall would vary
depending on site geometry.  
Mayor Kou asked what square footage MidPen would provide for the one, two and three
bedroom units.   
Mr. AuYeung answered the square footage would depend on the Community outreach. He
described what is typical.  
Public Comment: 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/ 11/2023
1. 
Brad E., Partner with Premier Properties, stated parking is the lifeblood of successful
retail. He thought
distributed
parking
was needed
throughout
Downtown. He
encouraged Staff to relook at the parking data as it has changed. He opined parking
availability needs to be adequate for peak demand.   
2. 
Michael Q. said that in order to have the housing element remain certified, they must
move from planning to building the units they promised the State. He encouraged
Council to take the opportunity to create as many affordable quality units Downtown as
possible while the window is open.   
3. 
Amie A., Executive Director of Palo Alto Forward, stated housing on City-owned parking
lots checks all the boxes. She urged Council to think more and bigger as the housing
need is great. She discussed the needs of the aging homeless population. She said that
there is a 2017 City of Palo Alto parking study that compares transit development to
affordable development based on location.  
4. 
Patty I., resident at 850 Webster Street, supported using Downtown parking lots to build
subsidized affordable housing because the need to provide housing for the workers who
provide services for the area employers is urgent and growing. She urged Council to act
now on this issue.  
5. 
Marcia P., Resident Trustee on Channing House’s Board of Directors, read a letter on
behalf of Rhonda Bekkedahl, Channing House CEO, which supported using Downtown
parking lots to build subsidized affordable housing and discussed the great need and the
benefits it would serve.   
6. 
Adam S. emphasized the need for building more homes. He believed the location being
discussed would be outstanding. He suggested going big. He thought it was important to
increase density and minimize parking requirements. He felt the limits should be lifted
throughout the Downtown area, California and Camino in order to let buildings get built
without this much process, analysis, delay and expense.   
7. 
Avroh S.,  Student at Palo Alto High School, spoke on behalf of PASCC establishing
support for affordable and dense housing projects. PASCC supports adding more
housing
Downtown
especially
with
100% electrification. He
discussed
declining
enrollment in the Palo Alto schools which necessitates the need for affordable and
dense housing.  
8. 
Hamilton H. ( Zoom), former member of Housing Element Working Group, felt the
Downtown public land should be utilized for housing or parking. He thought ground
floor parking was ugly and not conducive to Community. He did not support not
providing enough parking to the low-income residents. He believed the City should help
out with funds subsidizing the delta between below and above ground parking. He also
supported Staff’s working resuming work on Lot A.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/ 11/2023
9. 
Randy M.R. ( Zoom) spoke from experience about the need for affordable and available
housing and parking.   
10. 
John S. ( Zoom), Thoits Bros., stated convenient and sufficient parking is important to
retail success. He asked Council to pause and direct Staff to more thoroughly study the
health of Downtown businesses and the seriously negative impacts the proposal before
them will have. He explained why he felt Lot T was a terrible location for a dense
development.  
11. 
Scott O. (Zoom) stated now was the time to ask for a shift in direction for a project sized
to meet the burgeoning housing hunger in Palo Alto. He encouraged them to push the
partners to think more on the scale of Mollie Stone’ s.   
Council Member Lythcott-Haims discussed her thoughts on the issue as to whether housing and
parking should be on the same lot. She hoped they would lean into the height limit.  
Council Member Lauing discussed the various considerations being considered and the Staff
proposal. He agreed that they should pick a lot and move forward on the first project. He
wanted to see if they could have a mix of income levels in any new building of residents on one
or more of the parking sites they are looking at for equity. He thought they should get a couple
more proposals on a high affordable housing component, workforce housing or some other
kind of housing above 80% AMI. He thought the scarcity of open City land should guide them in
determining parking and see what it takes to fund some underground parking to get to a
blended rate. He agreed they need to go down for parking and up for another floor. If T and D
were the best functional thing to do, he would support that. He thought parking data needed to
be included in the outreach.  
Vice Mayor Stone thought Lot T made sense with regard to the housing piece but was
interested in what else is out there. He was more interested in the affordable housing piece
over the workforce housing and gave his reasons for that. He agreed with pushing the limits of
height. He thought it was important to provide onsite parking for a variety of reasons.  
Council Member Burt asked at what AMI are the affordable housing developers not eligible for
the tax credits. He supported having as great of a mix of income levels they could have while
still having the developers being able to tap into the essential tax credits. He thought it was
important to have a certain amount of parking on site and would be valuable if the parking
could be a combination of parking for the residents and for Downtown retail and otherwise use
based on time of day sharing. He was open to increasing the height with adding a setback of the
top two stories. He surmised having the first floor be parking was the right solution. He felt they
wanted to reduce the demand for parking but not externalize that demand onto others. He
thought the dollars in the Parking In-Lieu Fund should be applied to additional parking. He was
against using millions of general fund dollars to subsize parking for office in the Downtown
area. The only way he would envision using the In-Lieu dollars for Lot D would be a combination
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/ 11/2023
of parking and affordable housing on that project at a future date. He noted that affordable
housing supports the needs of the business community.  
Director Lait said it was in the 80% range and would depend on which program they are going
with.  
Mr. AuYeung concurred with 80% adding as a project you have to average 59% for 4% tax
credits and 50% for 9% tax credit programs.  
Council Member Tanaka thought the distribution of parking and more parking was critical to
Downtown retail. He liked the idea of higher heights. He mentioned that the City does not have
a lot of revenue and discussed ways to better manage the properties. He thought the cost of
1.1M per unit listed on Slide 11 was high and implored his Colleagues to think about ways to
maximize the resources they have and use market forces to create more affordable housing for
people.    
Council Member Lythcott-Haims discussed the city workers who do not get singled out for
housing specifically for them and cautioned against the narrow tailoring around specific jobs
and categories of people.  
Mayor Kou aligned herself with Vice Mayor Stone’s and Council Member Burt’s comments and
to some of Council Member Tanaka’ s comments. She felt they had an opportunity to focus on
housing for seniors and developmentally disabled. She reminded that teacher housing is not in
perpetuity. She supported genuine affordable housing on City land but she was also open to the
public lands being for City’s workforce. She wanted to see a concerted effort made to reduce
the number of Downtown permits required when this comes back with more information. She
expressed interest in seeing Lot C being considered for senior housing and the Senior
Nutritional Program.  
Council Member Burt thought senior housing at Lot C would be on his list of most likely next
projects to explore. He wanted to focus on moving forward with this one for the time being. His
intention in not including a response to Staff proposed recommendation Number 1 was that
there was no direction to resume work.  
City Manager Shikada stated the baseline assumption was that a new parking structure would
be funded with a combination of existing Parking In-Lieu funds as well as whatever gap is
necessary to fill using presumably City CIP funds. The next step with that direction would be to
review the prior work that was done and bring back the parameter set forth here in
consultation with the housing developers to give the Council more specific information
including potential funding sources to cover that gap.  
Council Member Burt responded that a leading commercial property owner and developer
Downtown expressed that there is no near-term need for additional parking Downtown but he
does not want to see the In-Lieu dollars spent otherwise. He would like to focus on getting this
project going and then figure out where to go from there.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/ 11/2023
Mayor Kou added that more traffic and parking analysis would be needed looking pre-
pandemic. She asked if there is an urgency to do Lot D.  
City Attorney Stump explained that State Law has a set of rules around In-Lieu fees and the
local courts having said that this Parking In-Lieu fee is a development impact fee that has to
comply with those rules. The end of this year will be the end of a five-year period where Council
will need to account for unspent funds. State law does contemplate that funds collected from
developers for infrastructure projects are used in some kind of timely way and it is time to
make those five-year findings and if funds remain unspent, they do require the City to identify
what project is contemplated, the timing around that and the source of any additional funds
that will be needed. Not building parking Downtown may have implications with respect to the
retention of the Parking In-Lieu fees currently in the City’s possession. An accounting report will
need to be accepted in December and findings made in January. It was anticipated that Council
would make a commitment to move forward out of this item. If Council decided to emphasize
housing, there would be other complications in terms of parking that would go away from the
use of a surface lot and would be an issue separate from the state law certification. They would
have to look at how to make those findings in January.  
Council Member Burt asked if they continue with an evaluation of Lot D with no net loss in
parking from a future structure that might be a combination of housing and parking utilizing the
In-Lieu funds and only having other funding to replace the loss of surface parking and not to
have a net increase in parking beyond what could be paid for via the In-Lieu funds, would that
be what Staff would need guidance on to meet the five-year state standard.   
City Attorney Stump offered that the Parking In-Lieu program is based on the provision of
additional parking resources. Those funds would not be available to replace other spaces that
go away because of another City project. She believed that if the Council gave the direction to
proceed with the garage that is designed and already subject to environmental review at Lot D, 
they would be able to bring those findings forward to Council in January.  
City Manager Shikada added to support the findings that were described, they anticipate
needing a project. They would need to be making progress on the development
and
construction of a project.  
Chief Assistant City Attorney Arellano explained they have the concept of removing surface
parking lots and replacing them with housing units. There is also concern around AB 2097 and
not being able to require parking for development within one-half mile of high quality public
transit so they are trying to anticipate what parking demands might come from developments
that do not include onsite parking. They also have the question about the In-Lieu fee funds. 
These three buckets of parking could be filled using Lot D or whatever other parking structure
that could result from this planning process. He mentioned taking into account potential
changes to parking configurations along University Avenue when Council looks at the University
Streetscape Project.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/ 11/2023
Council Member Tanaka said would vote no for Number 2 if there was no analysis of market-
rate housing or senior housing.  
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Mayor Kou to direct staff to: 
1. Resume work on a new parking structure in the downtown core on a City surface
parking lot ( previously designed for on Hamilton / Waverley Lot D at 375 Hamilton
Avenue) based on the premise that City funds for parking at this site would only be for
the purpose of replacing lost surface parking. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Veenker absent
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING
2. Pursue refined proposals for potential housing development on City surface parking lot
on Lytton / Kipling Lot T at 450 Lytton Avenue, or elsewhere, with direction on key
development goals: 
a. 100% affordable housing up to the 80% AMI that qualifies for relevant tax
credits. 
b. Height allowance and/ or density evaluate to two additional stories above
current 50-foot height limit with the additional stories being set back from the
street face. 
c. Evaluate parking on site that would be available for the affordable housing
residents and potentially shared use for public purposes. Pursue transit pass
provisions for residents as well as other best practices in reducing single
occupancy vehicle use.  
MOTION PASSED: 5-1-1, Tanaka no, Veenker absent
9. 
Adopt a Resolution Establishing the Council Annual Calendar of Meetings, Breaks and
Council Events for the Calendar Year 2024. 
Interim City Clerk Mahealani Ah Yun introduced the 2024 calendar for the City Council meeting
dates, vacation dates, proposed alternate dates for special meetings and event dates.    
Council Member Lauing noted the calendar shows no Council Committee meetings in January. 
He wondered if that could be shortened because it would mean that after reorganization on
the 8th it will be another 4 weeks before Committees get going.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/ 11/2023
Council Member Burt shared concern on that issue. He proposed that until new committees are
appointed, the composition of the old committee can continue and hold meetings in January.  
City Manager Shikada noted there is a unique situation this coming year with all of the Council
Members continuing.   
Council Member Burt added under the current protocol, the Mayor serves as the substitute
member for committees if there is not a quorum so that would be able to occur presumably in
future years where they have a high turnover. He assumed June 17 was planned for the final
budget meeting and an underline of June 24 for a possible 4th Monday meeting. Historically, if
an extra night was needed on the budget, they used the next Tuesday night so he wanted to ask
if the Colleagues would rather do that. 
City Manager Shikada noted that production of Staff reports can be a challenge during the
holidays with respect to the January committee meetings. He thought they could look at the
specifics of when meetings are scheduled and accommodate accordingly.   
MOTION: Council Member Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to adopt a
resolution establishing the Annual Summer ( June 21 – August 4, 2024) and Winter (December
20, 2024 – January 5, 2025) Breaks, Council Regular and alternate meeting dates and Council
event schedule from January to December 2024 with the following changes: 
1. Elimination of Finance Committee meeting on Tuesday, March 5th, 2024 and to be
rescheduled. 
2. Add Tuesday, June 18th, 2024 as an optional additional City Council meeting. 
3. Eliminate Monday, June 24th, 2024 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Veenker absent
10. 
Approval of Amendments to the Employment Agreements between the City of Palo Alto
and Council Appointed Officers, specifically the City Manager, and City Attorney and
Adoption of Amended Resolution Amending Appointment Term for Interim City Clerk
through March 31, 2024 and salary adjustment. CEQA Status - Not a Project
Council Member Burt explained that these recommendations are based upon their closed
session CAO review and this is the public presentation.  
Council Member Tanaka stated he could not support Item Number 2 because he thought there
should be more connection between pay and performance.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 12/ 11/2023
Human Resources Director Sandra Blanch
MOTION: Mayor Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to approve and authorize the
Mayor to execute the following contract amendments for Council Approved Officers and
Adoption of Amended Resolution Amending Appointment Term for Interim City Clerk: 
1. Amendment No. 11 to Employment Agreement between the City of Palo Alto and Molly
S. Stump (Attachment A); 
2. Amendment to Resolution Amending Appointment Term for Interim City Clerk through
March 31, 2024, and salary adjustment in alignment with increase for all unrepresented
Management and Professional employees (Attachment C). 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Veenker absent
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING
3. Amendment No. 5 to Employment Agreement between the City of Palo Alto and Ed
Shikada (Attachment B); and
MOTION PASSED: 5-1-1, Tanaka no, Veenker absent
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:03 P.M. 
