Council Appointed Officers Committee
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 6
Special Meeting
May 1, 2023
The Chair of the Council Appointed Officers Committee met on this date in the Council
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 4:02 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Stone (Chair) 
Present Remotely:  
Absent: 
Public Comment
None. 
Action Items
1. Discussion and Recommendation to Council regarding City Clerk vacancy
City Manager Ed Shikada announced this item was following up on the Committee’ s next steps
for recommendation to the Full Council in terms of the City Clerk.  
Mayor Kou asked staff to provide the Committee with the procedure to occur after receiving
notice from one of the CAOs.  
City Manager Shikada did not know that there was a procedure and stated Council may want to
establish one. The appointment of an interim would be an assumption that Council would want
to proceed with recruitment and selection of a permanent replacement.  
Chair Stone suggested recommending to Council tonight an interim position and that the
recruitment process for a permanent position begin. If the current consulting company was
used, the process could be four months for the permanent appointment. He inquired if seeking
additional consultants would take two to three months longer. He noted that the current clerk’s
last day would be May 19.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 6
Sp. Council Appointed Officer’s Committee Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 01/2023
HR Director Sandra Blanch answered that with seeking additional consultants another one to
two months would be needed to request proposals, have the Committee review proposals, and
implement a contract. 
Council
Member
Burt queried
as to when
prospective
recruiting
agencies
were
last
investigated. He was interested in understanding the range of options for recruiters. He
requested City Clerk Lesley Milton provide insights on the ability to have internal staffing for an
interim clerk versus other options. He questioned if the office was still one person from an
authorized level and if there were active candidates for that position. He asked City Clerk
Milton
her thoughts
on the ability
of a three-person
office
covering
the
necessary
requirements. He was inclined to put out a bid for recruitment and, at the same time, 
encourage the Clerk to consider candidates. He did not want the office to be two people short
with an interim leader.  
Director Blanch commented that they had requested proposals in 2021, but it had been some
time since Council interviewed recruiters prior to that.  
City Clerk Lesley Milton found continuity of operations to be a critical operational aspect. She
discussed two Deputy Clerks who were qualified and, in her opinion, could carry on with the
operations of the office. She noted that they had experience through the full cycle of
operations, except recalls. The office was still one person from authorized level. She indicated
the position was budgeted. They had not actively recruited, but there were other active
recruitments in other departments and eligibility lists, which they could pull from quickly. She
voiced that a three-person office could cover the necessary requirements and specified that
work would have to be prioritized. She believed it would be wise to fill the unfilled position. She
remarked that there would be a learning curve in bringing in someone from outside. She would
put something in process concerning considering candidates, which she thought could be done
in the next several weeks.  
City Manager Shikada asked the HR Director to comment on the consultant selection and the
existing contract. They were under contract for senior staff selections, not Council appointed.  
Director Blanch replied that there was a contract with Teri Black & Company, which had been
used for executive leadership recruitments and other high-level managers.  
Council Member Burt asked what Peckham & McKenney specialized in. 
Director Blanch stated they specialized in a range of positions, similar to Teri Black & Company.  
Mayor Kou inquired of Council Member Burt if he was interested in putting out a posting for
the interim position.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 6
Sp. Council Appointed Officer’s Committee Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 01/2023
Council Member Burt clarified that he was referring to the fifth position in the Clerk’s office. 
Chair Stone asked if Council Member Burt was inclined to fill the final position and do an
internal interim position until there was a permanent position.  
Council Member Burt was interested in doing that simultaneously and noted that the interim
clerk would probably be appointed before the other position was filled. He requested staff
provide information for the consultant being used and if there would be benefit in considering
other firms. He was not wedded to changing firms.  
Director Blanch noted that Teri Black had most recently assisted the City in recruiting for
several positions in the City Manager’ s office and for the Police Chief.  
Chair Stone inquired as to the timeline if they remained with Teri Black versus changing firms. 
Director Blanch noted that remaining with Teri Black expedited the process because they would
not have to do the contacting. She explained the process for changing firms. She expressed that
it would probably take four months if the current firm was used, and if an RFP and contracting
had to be done, it would be an additional two months minimum.  
Mayor Kou thought it would be helpful to provide Council with information for other
consultants. She asked what services Raftelis provided. She inquired if it was appropriate for
Council to appoint employees.  
Council Member Burt clarified that the hiring would be done by the current or the interim clerk. 
The question was if the Committee was encouraging that position to be filled promptly. He
queried if having an open contract with Teri Black was an advantage. He had been satisfied with
the work done by Peckham & McKenney and was inclined to use them and asked how much it
would add to the timeline if that firm was used.  
Director Blanch confirmed that having an open contract with Teri Black was an advantage. As
for using Peckham & McKenney, she discussed expected fees and it being under the City
Manager’ s authority. An informal RFP would be done to seek other quotes, and it would take 30
to 60 days.  
Chair Stone agreed with Council Member Burt regarding Peckham & McKenney. He questioned
if staff had concerns. He asked if Council direction would help expedite filling the fifth position.  
City Manager Shikada believed Procurement would need to be consulted to confirm the ability
to go directly to Peckham & McKenney. They could follow up. He expected there would be time
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 6
Sp. Council Appointed Officer’s Committee Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 01/2023
involved in getting a cost proposal and scope of work. Regarding the fifth position, he expressed
that staff would proceed and that Council direction was not necessary.  
City Clerk Milton thought they could work with Human Resources staff and expedite getting a
good pool of candidates to fill the fifth position. She would be hesitant to appoint somebody
and thought it would be more appropriate for the interim clerk to do the appointment. She
commented that she had been successful with that process recently.  
Chair Stone asked how the Committee should proceed in making a recommendation to the Full
Council for an internal interim position and if the Committee should recommend a specific
candidate.  
Council Member Burt answered that formal notification had not been received regarding the
Deputy Clerks’ interest in the positions and asked what the process should be.   
City Attorney Molly Stump expressed that it was not appropriate to discuss qualifications of
individuals in an open meeting, and it could be scheduled as a closed meeting if desired. The HR
director reviewing potential applicants for meeting the minimum job qualifications was a
technical step that needed to be taken.  
Council Member Burt asked if the Committee should be open to applications to include internal
applications for the interim clerk. 
City Attorney Stump stated a recommendation needed to be made to Council to invite letters of
interest and resumes from interested applicants.  
City Manager Shikada thought it could be on consent if it was unanimous. The City Clerk may
want to get it on the agenda quickly and maybe as a late packet item for next week.  
Mayor Kou inquired if Council needed to see the letters of interest.  
City Attorney Stump noted that there may need to be a recommendation to Council concerning
the next step. The HR director should advise the Committee on the minimum qualifications, 
pay, etc. She asked if the recommendation would be to place it on Council’ s agenda for the
appointment or the Committee’ s agenda and then back to Council.  
Director Blanch commented that in the past the CAO Committee or the Full Council interviewed
the interim candidates. HR could receive the applications and suggest the qualified candidates
to be interviewed and then discuss next steps.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 6
Sp. Council Appointed Officer’s Committee Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 01/2023
Mayor Kou declared time was of the essence. She requested the process be expedited as much
as possible and to make sure HR had all letters of interest and resumes and that they interview
the candidates and then there be a Full Council interview.  
Council Member Burt agreed that it may not be necessary for the CAO to interview the interim
clerk. He requested making a recommendation to the Council that would hopefully go on
consent a week from now and that staff prepare for that outcome. He queried when the
interviews could be done for the interim clerk. He explained how using Peckham & McKenney, 
the recruiters that were used a couple years ago, could streamline the process and reduce the
fee.  
Director Blanch indicated that the internal posting would be a quick process, and they could
request applications be submitted in a matter of five days, and then it would be a matter of
scheduling. She agreed the process would be streamlined by using Peckham & McKenney but
she did not know if the fee would be reduced.  
City Manager Shikada noted that the new Council members may want to review and have input
on the recruiters.  
Discussion ensued regarding the motion content.  
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Mayor Kou to recommend that the full
Council:  
A. Invite letters of interest and a resume from interested internal applicants for the interim
clerk position, have HR review for qualifications and schedule a closed session interview
of candidates with the full Council
B. Contract with the recruitment firm Peckham and McKenney who conducted the
previous City Clerk recruitment, and the literature previously used be included in a late
packet report on the next meeting agenda
City Manager Shikada remarked that the process going forward after receiving a proposal from
Peckham & McKenney may lead to the follow-on action after the approval of the consent item
by Council.  
Public Comment
There were no requests to speak.  
Mayor Kou asked when there would be discussion of the interim clerk’s package. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 6
Sp. Council Appointed Officer’s Committee Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 01/2023
City Manager Shikada thought it would be after or a part of the closed session and following
interviews with the Council discussing next steps, including compensation changes.  
MOTION PASSED: 3-0
Future Meetings and Agendas
City Manager Shikada noted that upon Council approving the consent item, the Committee
would probably receive a proposal from Peckham & McKenney that would require Council
approval. At that time, perhaps there could be discussion with the Full Council regarding the
process going forward for the selection of the permanent City Clerk.  
Chair Stone mentioned that following that there may need to be further discussion by the CAO
Committee.   
Adjournment: The meeting was adjourned at 4:39 P.M.  
