CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 25
Special Meeting
May 8, 2023
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:03 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely:  
Absent:  
Call to Order
Mayor Kou called the meeting to order. The meeting was being held in honor of Mental Health
Awareness Month. She read a proclamation and proclaimed the month of May to be Mental
Health Awareness Month. She asked that the community recommit to increasing awareness
and understanding of mental health, reduce stigma and discrimination, and promote services
for all with mental health conditions.  
Deputy City Clerk Mahealani Ah Yun took roll call and noted all were present. 
Special Orders of the Day
1. 
Proclamation
Recognizing
Public
Employees
and
City
Service
Accomplishments
Coinciding With National Public Service Recognition Week: May 7-13, 2023
Council Member Lythcott-Haims read the proclamation recognizing public employees and City
service accomplishments coinciding with National Public Service Recognition Week of May 7-
13, 2023. She announced that Mayor Kou had proclaimed May 7-13, 2023 Public Service
Recognition Week. All were encouraged to recognize the accomplishments and contributions of
government employees at all levels.  
City Manager Ed Shikada recognized those who had been part of the City team for 25 years and
over. He announced the names of the sixteen 25-year employees and the names of the eleven
30-year employees and asked them to join him at the podium. He also recognized a number of
individuals that could not be present. He thanked them on behalf of the Palo Alto community. A
photo was arranged on the dais.  
Mayor Kou thanked them for their dedication and commitment.  
Closed Session
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
AA1. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY- POTENTIAL LITIGATION Subject: SPG Center, LLC, 
application for building permit for Building EE, Stanford Shopping Center Authority: 
Potential Exposure to Litigation Under Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(2) One
Case, as Defendant: Letter from Shimko to Yang, dated April 28, 2023
MOTION: Council Member Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to go into Closed
Session. 
Public Comments
There were no requests to speak. 
Council Member Veenker explained why she would recuse herself from the Closed Session.  
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Veenker abstain
Council went into Closed Session at 5:20 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:15 P.M. 
Mayor Kou announced no reportable action. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
City Manager Ed Shikada expressed that Item AA2 would be added to the Consent Calendar, 
which was approval of the CAO Committee recommendation to complete recruitment for
interim City Clerk and to engage Peckham & McKinney firm to conduct the City Clerk executive
recruitment. 
Public Comment
Aram James wanted to thank Dave Price, Editor of the Palo Alto Daily Post, for his editorial on
page six of today’s publication addressing police canines. He hoped the Police Department
would take notice.  
Maya Perkash, from PASCC, did not support the Stanford Shopping Center’ s request to avoid
the Natural Gas Ban Reach Code in one of their new buildings and stated that prioritizing the
Reach Code implementation was important. She addressed a concern cited by SPG on behalf of
the shopping center, and she claimed it was a common misconception that gas was needed for
cooking.  
KC Hetterly, an intern with the Santa Clara County Audubon Society, shared a presentation and
spoke about local and migratory bird species. She focused on the White-crowned Sparrow and
climate change and felines posing a threat to them.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
Julia Zeitlin, Co-founder of PASCC, supported Maya Perkash’ s comments regarding the Stanford
Shopping Center Reach Code dispute. She indicated that allowing exemptions would set a
dangerous precedent. She urged Council to continue to prioritize climate change and public
health.  
Carol Garsten, Co-Chair of Downtown Los Altos First Friday music event, was producing a new
monthly music event in Palo Alto on California Avenue called Third Thursday, and invited all to
attend the first event on May 18. She encouraged all to visit their website – 3rdthursday. fun.  
John Kelley requested Council collect, organize, and maintain all records regarding fallen trees
and major branches between August 1 and July 31, 2023, to aid in reconsidering the 2022 Tree
Ordinance. He would provide Council an outline of key points he thought the Council should
consider at next week’s meeting. He supported two-story detached ADUs and proposed that
ADUs less than 800 square feet not be subject to the 2022 Tree Ordinance. 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements
Mayor Kou thanked Community Services Department Director Kristen O’Kane, Recreation
Senior Community Services Manager Adam Howard, police, and all staff members for the
successful May Parade.  
Council Member Burt provided information on BCDC’ s update on the sea level rise threat. He
shared that Caltrain was pursuing weekend work on electrification, etc., to stay on schedule for
the full operation of the electrified system in the fall of 2024.  
Council Member Veenker shared that the Bay Area Air Quality Management District released its
annual report related to air quality and the climate, which was available online.  
Consent Calendar
2. 
Approval of Minutes from April 24, 2023 Meeting
3. 
Approval of the Sewer System Management Plan Update 2023 as required by the
reissued Statewide Waste Discharge Requirements General Order for Sanitary Sewer
Systems, Order 2022-0103-DWQ
4. 
Approval of Contract Number C23186907 With Cratus, Inc. in an Amount Not-to-Exceed
7,707,055 for Sanitary Sewer Replacement Project 31 (WC-19001) on El Camino Real
and Page Mill Road; Authorization for the City Manager to Negotiate and Execute
Related Change Orders for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $8,360,555; and Approval
of Budget Amendments in the Wastewater Collection Fund; CEQA status: categorically
exempt under CEQA Guidelines Sec. 15301 and 15302
5. 
Approval of a Contract Amendment for Time Only with Romig Engineers, Inc. for
Geotechnical Services for the Public Safety Building Capital Improvement Program
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
Project ( PE-15001); CEQA: Environmental Impact Report for the Public Safety Building
and the New California Avenue Area Parking Garage (Resolution No. 9772) 
6. 
Adopt an Ordinance and Resolution Continuing the Interim Parklet Program Until March
31, 2024; CEQA status – categorically exempt (Regulations 15301 and 15304) 
AA2. 
Approval of CAO Committee Recommendation to complete recruitment for interim City
Clerk and to engage Peckham & McKinney Firm to Conduct the City Clerk Executive
Recruitment
Public Comment
There were no requests to speak. 
Mayor Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 6. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 4. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Stone moved, seconded by Mayor Kou to approve Agenda Item Numbers
2-6, AA2. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 2, 3, 5, AA2: 7-0
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 4: 6-1, Tanaka no
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 6: 6-1, Kou no
Council Member Tanaka, regarding Item 4, agreed with replacing sewer pipes under El Camino
Real but questioned why it would not be acted on sooner. He addressed neighboring
communities paying less for such projects. He encouraged more competitive bidding in the
future.  
Mayor Kou, regarding Item 6, expressed that merchants were confused as to what the
extension was for and where it applied and questioned if there would a sense of order so they
could focus on business operation. She added that outreach involving merchants not in the car-
free zones was also necessary and thought signage should be addressed. She indicated that the
extension would cause concern among many business owners.  
City Manager Comments
City Manager Ed Shikada mentioned that feedback had been received from residents related to
affordable
mental
health
care, and
staff
compiled
available
services, available
at
cityofpaloalto. org/ BeWell. He pointed out the availability of the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline. 
There would be a Housing Resources Fair on May 13. He called attention to programs in
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
recognition of Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander Heritage Month in May, 
which were listed at cityofpaloalto. org/ AANHPIHeritageMonth. The Memorial to Honor PAPD
Officers would be May 15. He noted that upcoming summer activities could be found at
cityofpalo.org under News. He declared that City Council would have a study session related to
Cubberley property, a legislative update, and ordinance changes related to ADUs on May 15. On
The Finance Committee budget report and an ordinance related to firearm sales restrictions
would be on May 22. There would be a prescreening for the Valley Water Water Purification
Project, update and actions related to Project HomeKey, and action on the sustainability and
Climate Action Plan on June 5. He noted that there were several additional items through the
remainder of June. He declared that there would not be a City Council meeting on Memorial
Day, May 29. 
Mayor Kou invited the Planning & Transportation Commissioners to the dais, and a photo was
taken. 
Called to order the City Council and Planning and Transportation Commission Joint Special
meeting at 6:58 P.M. Roll was called for the Planning & Transportation Commissioners. 
Present In-person: Lu, Summa, Hechtman, Akin, Reckdahl, Chang, Templeton
Action Items
7. 
Adoption of a Resolution Adopting the 2023-31 Housing Element and Consideration of
the
Associated
California
Environmental
Quality
Act ( CEQA) Addendum
to the
Comprehensive Plan 2017 Final Environmental Impact Report
Planning and Development Services Director Jonathan Lait summarized that there would first
be a staff presentation. They were then anticipating one round of clarifying questions; public
comment; the meeting being turned over to Chair Summa and the PTC beginning deliberations; 
and after a recommendation, roles would be switched with the City Council. He noted that staff
and consultants were available on Zoom.  
Senior Planner Tim Wong noted that Council had before them adoption of the 2023-31 Housing
Element. He clarified that the purpose of this meeting was to review comments from HCD on
the draft the City submitted in December and to provide a summary of the proposed City
responses to those comments, to discuss of the CEQA Addendum, and to consider adopting the
Housing Element. He provided an overview of what would transpire in this meeting. He
recapped past events related to the Housing Element and the Draft CEQA Addendum. As
Council last saw the draft before the 30-day public review was completed, he provided a
summary of public comments that had been received, which included site inventory and
suitability, environmental
and
infrastructure
concerns, programs
being
objective
and
quantifiable, development standards creating constraints, application processing time frame
constraints, public participation being fair and equitable, enhancing housing affordability, 
programs to combat homelessness, ADU assumptions being too aggressive ( he noted HCD
methodology had been used), and strengthening of tenant protection policies. He remarked
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/08/2023
that the concerns had been addressed in the revised draft. He detailed the March 23, 2023 HDC
comment letter that had been received. HCD had commented that more analysis was needed, 
which the City provided, and that more local and regional knowledge and expansion of
discussions were needed. Many of the HCD comments were based on public comments, which
would be noted in the letter, and the City had addressed those comments. He supplied a slide
of the City’s Response Matrix and explained the formatting. He noted it would be expanded and
would go to HCD based on Council and PTC revisions. He remarked that HCD wanted more
information related to RHNA, which staff had provided. Concerning housing constraints, HCD
wanted more information of the City’s development
standards, which staff provided a
discussion and introduced analysis of physical modeling for feasibility. They were in the process
of preparing a feasibility study, so some results had been highlighted to HCD. Timelines had also
been addressed. Ordinances and fees would be investigated as a Housing Element Program, 
and potentially they would consider the parkland dedication fee. He specified that many
programs had been revised based on the Housing Element, that there was greater commitment
language, and the timeframe had been shortened. He stated that HCD wanted programs in
place within the first two years of the planning period. He announced that more implementing
objectives had been introduced primarily to meet the number of AFFH requirements. He
explained why staff recommended removing the PTOD and the Workforce Housing programs. 
He provided a slide with an example of a revised program. Staff had changed “ explore
incentives” to “research and implement incentives.” It was originally proposed to be initiated in
2027 but had been moved to 2025, and greater detail had been added to the implementing
objective. He highlighted that Program 4.2 would now include housing inspections, that a
formal process had been created for Program 6.1, SB 9 requirements were leveraged for
Program 6.3, and Program 6.6 would include more proactive measures, such as greater
outreach, expanding
funding, and
adopting
tenant
protections. He
displayed
a slide
summarizing the City’s responses to HCD comments. He provided examples how staff would do
more monitoring of housing constraints. He commented that there were about 30 programs
that needed to be done on an annual basis, and annual reports and summaries needed to be
available to the public. Regarding the CEQA Addendum, he voiced that staff had prepared an
addendum to the 2027 Comprehensive Plan, and noted there were no new or significant
impacts based on the Housing Element proposals. He declared that the City would have 30 days
to submit back to HCD if the Council adopted the Housing Element, and then HCD would have
60 days to review, so they were expecting HCD comments in August. If the City did not receive a
letter of compliance, there would be continued dialogue with HCD in the fall of 2023. Staff
recommended that PTC consider the addendum, review staff responses to the HCD comment
letter, and recommend that City Council adopt the Housing Element, and they recommended
that Council consider and approve the addendum, direct staff to make appropriate changes to
the Housing Element, and adopt the resolution that would adopt the Housing Element.  
Council Member Tanaka asked how much time members of the public would have to speak. He
requested that it be three minutes.  
Mayor Kou answered that each member of the public would be allotted one minute to speak.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/08/2023
Commissioner Reckdahl asked if other design perimeters had been looked at for GM and ROLM
areas. He pointed out that the more information given to HCD would allow them to better
assess 65 units being feasible.  
Senior Planner Wong clarified that 65 units per acre would help meet RHNA, but Council had
addressed approving up to 90 dwelling units per acre, so they would look at other development
standards.  
Director Lait stated that 65 dwelling units per acre would achieve RHNA obligations. The revised
draft included some preliminary analysis showing the feasibility of developing that density on
those properties. Some development constraints had been flagged for change in addition to
increasing the density to achieve the base RHNA obligation. He commented that City Council
had directed that a housing incentive program be considered, which would allow greater
density and would be above RHNA production. The program was intended to serve as an
alternative to the State Density Bonus, and they anticipated developers would see it as an
attractive alternative to that. A developer could seek to develop housing based on the base
zoning standards of 65 dwelling units and use the State Density Bonus or they could take
advantage of the Housing Incentive Program, which would convey increased height, floor area, 
etc. The City was not allowed to use the State Density Bonus for RHNA, and the Housing
Incentive Program would not be used for RHNA and was in addition to RHNA.  
Vice Chair Chang asked what the odds were of passing compliance with HCD after round two. 
Regarding Program 6.3, she requested an understanding of the reference to 800 to 1,200
square feet SB 9 projects and asked what it would mean in terms of setbacks and single-story
overlays and if 1,200 would apply in any event. She asked if expanding it to 1,200 would allow
the single-story overlay to prevail unless it did not allow a 1,200 square foot unit. 
Senior Planner Wong hoped that the lesson learned from Southern California jurisdictions were
being applied to the City’s Housing Element, thus increasing the odds of being compliant. They
were happy that a short HCD letter was received.  
Director Lait believed the update responded
to HCD’s corrections. He expressed that
compliance was increasing after round two, and HCD had a website detailing that. They wanted
to loosen the minimum State-set standard regarding Program 6.3, and this program would
allow an 800 square foot unit to be increased to 1,200 square feet, which he explained the
possible benefits of. Regarding SB 9 and a single-story overlay, he understood that the single-
story overlay would prevail except where it did not achieve the minimum unit size. He clarified
that the single-story overlay would be based on 800 square feet. 
Assistant City Attorney Albert Yang clarified that SB 9 required that the City permit at least 800
square feet per unit, which the City created as the maximum. Now staff was proposing
increasing that to 1,200 square feet. He acknowledged
that 1,200 would apply in all
circumstances and indicated that detailed designed standards were adopted when the SB 9
Ordinance was adopted. Upper floor step backs, setbacks, etc., had been considered and most
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/08/2023
likely would not need adjustment. During implementation, staff may find design standards they
would like to refine. He did not believe a single-story overlay would be enforceable under SB 9
if it did not allow creation of a minimum size of 800. Regarding the single-story overlay, he
noted that 1,200 would be the local maximum. 
Mayor Kou asked if the local per unit square foot maximum would be 1,200 and the minimum
800.  
Director Lait affirmed that was correct.  
Council Member Veenker asked what had been done to investigate non-vacant sites, what the
standards of review had been, and if current use would impede additional residential
development. She inquired if required site-specific findings were based on evidence that the
use would likely be discontinued during the planning process and, if so, what was the evidence. 
She asked the process for property owners removing their properties from the index.  
Assistant City Attorney Yang explained that letters were sent to all property owners on the
housing inventory list, and they were given the opportunity to remove their property by a
certain date. A few properties were removed from the inventory. They had received
clarifications, which had been addressed.  
Director Lait indicated an email correspondence had been sent to the Council today regarding a
property on Bay Shore Road that had been inadvertently included in the draft.  
Council Member Veenker queried if the clarifying email correspondence addressed property
owners’ intent on continuing use or willingness to change to a residential use.  
Senior Planner Wong indicated that conversations included explaining to the property owner
that these were not exclusive uses, that there was opportunity to add residential, and that
programs were being put in place that would spur residential property production. Based on
that, they chose to keep their property on the list. He detailed the methodology used to
determine non-vacancies and discussed the sites considered.  
Assistant City Attorney Yang stated that existing use of a non-vacant site being an impediment
to residential development was the future of the State law, and to overcome that, the City
would have to provide evidence that the site would redevelop. It was not required that the
evidence be site specific. He noted that other jurisdictions with compliant housing elements
had used the same type of methodology.  
Vice Mayor Stone queried if staff was aware of any courts having stepped in to decide the
adequacy of a city’s housing element; if the redlined version of Page 3-3 regarding a housing
project at 3001 El Camino Real, an SB 330 application, had a scheduled hearing date for May 2
by the ARB; and if the success rate of projects being submitted and receiving building permits in
other cities was known. He asked what information HCD was requesting related to a larger
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/08/2023
regional study of housing as well as greater local knowledge. He inquired if an 83% entitlement
success rate was good.  
Assistant City Attorney Yang voiced that there was one court case recently, but he believed it
concerned the fifth cycle of the Housing Element. The element had been certified, and the
Court found that it was not compliant with State law, as a statutory requirement had been
omitted. He mentioned that the May 4 Packet included an updated exhibit to the resolution, 
which included a detailed table showing how the City’s element complied with each statutory
requirement.  
Director Lait believed there had been an ARB hearing on May 2 related to 3001 El Camino Real. 
He did not believe staff had records on other jurisdictions’ success rates of projects being
submitted and receiving building permits. 
Consultant Brenna Weatherby specified that HCD had asked for additional local and regional
information related to the AFFH analysis. As for the success rate of the project, HCD wanted to
know how often projects were developed in the city. The HCD did not want many applications
coming forward without projects coming to fruition and wanted details related to how likely it
would be that projects coming through the application stage would be developed. She
remarked that an 83% success rate was good and average. 
Commissioner Templeton inquired if Slide 12 indicated that only the PTOD program would be
cancelled.  
Director Lait noted that eliminating the program did nothing to existing policies, regulations, or
processes with respect to PTOD and added little to no value to HCD in terms of the Housing
Element. They had many objectives to implement, and they wanted to dispose of ones not
adding value. It could be pursued but did not need to be in the Housing Element.  
Commissioner Templeton asked if Director Lait’s response indicated that no one was using the
PTOD program and that there were requirements in Building and Planning that would cover
pedestrian and transient-oriented development requirements. She inquired if fees other than
parkland dedication had been considered to support affordable housing. She asked in what
category the other fees were listed. She questioned what other areas related to fees could help
in building affordable housing.  
Director Lait did not disagree with Commissioner Templeton’ s comments regarding PTOD. He
indicated the PTC could address in their discussion fees that would aid in building affordable
housing.  
Senior Planner Wong clarified that the analysis of fees was not to support affordable housing
but fees being a constraint to housing production or adding affordability. He noted than an
analysis of the fees had been in Chapter 4.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
Commissioner Lu queried as to the tradeoffs of submitting a draft for review versus adopting it
today.  
Director Lait expressed that was a policy decision before PTC and for Council to decide going
forward. Letters had been received asking that it be submitted as a draft to HCD, which was an
acceptable process. He described what that process would entail. Staff was asking Council if
they felt comfortable approving this. He noted that there were findings stating this would be in
substantial compliance with State law. There was no downside for adoption versus submitting a
draft.  
MOTION: Council Member Lythcott-Haims moved, seconded by Council Member Tanaka, to
appeal the presiding officer’s decision that members of the public get one minute to speak.  
City Attorney Molly Stump stated the ruling of a presiding officer could be appealed, so the
question would be if one minute would be upheld, which should be voted on by the whole
group.  
Mayor Kou declared there would be a discussion. 
Council Member Burt encouraged the Council to follow the procedures recently adopted, which
was the presiding determining the amount of time once the number of speakers was known. He
thought the vote was premature. He asked the makers if they would pull their motion and
follow the recently adopted procedure, and if there was disagreement in speaking time, then
proceed with the vote.  
Commissioner Templeton agreed with Council Member Burt. She noted that public comment
submissions had been closed upon completion of the staff presentation, and suggested public
speakers be totaled.  
Council Member Veenker noted that the policy indicated speaking time was to be at the
discretion of the Mayor. She asked if the agenda gave prior notice to the public that speaking
time would be one minute.  
City Attorney Stump declared it had never been the practice that the agenda specify public
speaking time. She indicated that time allotted was to be at the discretion of the Mayor.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims was happy to withdraw the motion and follow the procedure
process.  
Mayor Kou noted that the motion had been withdrawn.  
Commissioner Hechtman outlined where the fee information had been collected from. He
questioned who determined substantial compliance and if HCD determined compliance if it
related back to the date of adoption.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
Assistant City Attorney Yang stated that HCD had a process of certification required for some
State grants but it was not set forth in the statute as the arbiter of compliance. The courts
would make the final decision, and the courts reinforced that they owed no deference to HCD. 
The City could not declare itself in compliance. Council could make findings of what was
believed to be compliant. If a Housing Element was adopted that they believed to be
substantially compliant, it would be compliant as of the date of adoption.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims requested the language on Page 5-38 regarding the middle
housing program and the language used of “ up to four units” and “ three or more detached
units” be reconciled. The fees on Pages 4-69 and 4-70 concerned her, and she questioned how
they had been calculated. Regarding HIP and expedited review, she asked for an example of HIP
waivers that had been issued and asked how many applications had been received requesting
expedited review. She found errors with Figures 2-11 and 2-23 and the listings of black families
and white families, and she noted that Figure 2-23 did not depict African American families on
the chart. She encouraged staff to define the cost burden as gross income, not just income. She
explained that Oak Park Manor Townhouses seemed to fall in the at-risk category on Page 2-74. 
She would send staff an email regarding the technical matters.   
Assistant City Attorney Yang explained the terms “ up to four units” and “ three or more units.” 
He noted that four was the maximum under State law. Two units would be allowed. Concerning
the fee calculation, he remarked that over the course of the next several years all impact fees
would be on a square footage basis, which was a separate requirement of State law. He
explained that parkland dedication was different, which he would research as he did not
currently have an answer.   
Director Lait thought Council direction had been received to use square footage in the fee
calculation concerning parkland dedication and that it was being implemented. He believed two
projects had taken advantage of HIP and expedited review. There was a program to extend and
increase development incentives under HIP. One project had gone through the process related
to objective standards, and the City processed it in a timely manner and in accordance with
State law.  
Chair Summa inquired if each split from an SB 9 lot split could have two units and an ADU. 
Assistant City Attorney Yang answered there would be a maximum of two units on each lot if SB
9 was used to split the lot.  
Council Member Burt asked if it was correct under SB 9 that a split lot could have a single-family
home and a junior and a senior ADU on each lot. Regarding parkland dedication fees and office-
to-residential conversion, he questioned if there was a mechanism for crediting past impact
fees for office that would be credited against the new use. He questioned if the same cost-
burden calculation was used regardless of income level. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
Assistant City Attorney Yang answered that if a lot were split under SB 9, there would be a
maximum of two units. Regarding parkland dedication fees and office-to-residential conversion, 
there was a mechanism for crediting the existing use, but he did not know the exact calculation.  
Director Lait did not know if there was a mechanism for crediting past impact fees. Council
could implement a policy.  
Senior Planner Wong remarked that the same cost-burden calculation was used regardless of
income level. 
Mayor Kou inquired if the removal of 3550 West Bayshore Road from the inventory had been
replaced; if there was a limit to the number of amendments in the document; if there were
ROLM properties on the east side of 101; if a low-density neighborhood could potentially have
a faith-based institution, which could potentially be over 100 units with no parking; and if there
were affordability restrictions imposed for SB 9. 
Senior Planner Wong explained that 3550 West Bayshore Road was part of a small surplus, so it
was not necessary to replace it. He noted there were no ROLM properties east of 101. As for
affordability restrictions, they applied the base BMR requirement of 15%. 
Director Lait answered there was a limit of four amendments for the calendar year. Concerning
faith-based institutions, he believed that there was a program to develop standards for such
situations, which he would confirm. They would develop regulations that would go before
Council before implementation. 
Commissioner Akin inquired as to the consequences if adoption of a Housing Element was
delayed and the deadline missed. 
Assistant City Attorney Yang declared the deadline had been missed, which was January 31, and
that there would not be significant new consequences for further delay, but they would like
adoption of an element as soon as ready.  
Mayor Kou allotted 3 minutes of speaking time for individual public speakers and 10 minutes
for a group of 5. 
Public Comment
Robert Chun (on behalf of – 1. Steve Levy 2. Scott O'Neil 3. Amy Sung 4. Gail Price 5. Sheryl Klein
6. Fangfei Yin 7. Michael Quinn 8. Adam Schwaltz 9. Elaine Uang 10. Natalie Geise), Board
Members of Palo Alto Forward, had been engaged in the Housing Element process at every
stage. He noted that their perspective on the Housing Element had been summarized in a
letter, which was available at paloaltoforward. com. He provided slides and suggestions which
he claimed would improve Housing Element Draft, which included financial feasibility and
density. He urged the City to conduct an independent analysis of the financial feasibility of the
zoning proposed by the Housing Element, which was critical due to the City having a statutory
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
obligation under State law to mitigate housing constraints. He explained why HIP did not fix the
core problem and encouraged reading Page 15 of the HCD Site Inventory Guidebook. He
addressed timeline constraints and there being little engagement with property owners and
tenants of non-vacant sites in the inventory. He noted that page 27 in the HCD Site Inventory
Guidebook addressed site specific inventory requirements. He did not see evidence the
threshold had been met in gathering interest for developing housing or redeveloping as such. 
He commented that there were sites in the element which property owners had indicated
would not convert to housing during the planning period. They were concerned about
constraints on housing production. They understood the HCD comment letter to say it was not
possible to have an effective or compliant housing element until concerns were addressed.  
Mike Alcheck, attorney and former member, Vice Chair, and Chair of the Planning Commission, 
encouraged Council to address housing constraints, which he stated included zoning, height, 
and density limits. He asked that antiquated zones be eliminated and that the limit be increased
to 40 units per acre. He stated that HCD had addressed existing barriers to non-vacant site
redevelopment.  
Cindy Carrol supported adoption of affordable housing efforts, which was an opportunity to
build diversity. She suggested the city be peppered with housing units instead of large units. 
She spoke of converting investment properties to housing. She asked that Council do what was
legally required, best for the long term, and fair.  
Michelle Kraus noted that her comments were from Chair Kaloma Smith. They were on the
Human Relations Commission and speaking as individuals. The discrepancy in the racial equity
information concerned them. She was also concerned about the assumptions of housing costs. 
If this were referred to the HRC, they would examine the issues. She stated that housing should
be available to all.  
Albert Lustre (Zoom) with Northern California Carpenters Local Union 405 spoke concerning the
need for implementation of area labor standards in the next housing element, which included a
livable wage, healthcare, apprenticeship, and hiring locally. He asked what was being done to
ensure [inaudible] standards in the new housing element.  
Sunita de Tourreil thanked the Mayor for three minutes to speak. She hoped the errors of the
past would be considered in implementing the Housing Element, that the history of the land
would be considered, and that there would be reflection on the disadvantages of redlining. She
opined that public speaking time of one minute was inadequate and asked that there be two to
three minutes or no speaking time.   
John Kelley thanked Mayor Kou for the speaking time and associated himself with the remarks
of Sunita de Tourreil regarding the time limit. He spoke of affirmatively furthering fair housing, 
government constraints on housing, and sites. He indicated that decisions should consider how
schools would be affected and asked why half of the housing units would be sequestered in the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
southeast corner of Palo Alto. He discussed high housing taxes and requested reducing taxes
and increasing the number of plexes in the existing multifamily zones.  
Liz Gardner ( Zoom) was pleased that speaking time had been increased to three minutes. She
discussed housing being front and center to quality of life. She felt that the quality of building
material was missing from the presentation. She did not agree with building homes in the
ROLM commercial areas, and opined there needed to be smaller homes throughout the city.  
Mayor Kou turned the meeting over to PTC Chair Summa and invited Council members to join
her in the public seating area.  
Chair Summa welcomed all to the PTC portion of the meeting. She suggested there be a break. 
The Commission took a seven-minute break.] 
Chair Summa thanked the public speakers and staff for their work. She opened the floor for
clarifying questions.  
Senior Planner Wong asked how the action items should be structured.  
Chair Summa reminded the Commission that there was to be consideration of the final
environmental
report and of the redline changes to the Housing Element and then a
determination if it should be recommended to Council for adoption. She asked the Commission
to speak to items each was interested in rather than going through items one by one.  
Commissioner Hechtman agreed with the process and thought recommendations could be
made at the end of the process, first making a recommendation on the addendum and then a
recommendation on the Housing Element.  
Chair Summa indicated that would be fine.  
Vice Chair Chang thought the Commission had previously voted on the EIR and did not know if
it needed to be voted on again unless the redlined version impacted the addendum to the EIR.  
Director Lait thought there had been minor clarifications or refinements to the EIR addendum
since PTC reviewed it. He thought PTC considered the addendum at the last meeting. He
requested the addendum be considered before the recommendation to Council.  
Assistant
City Attorney
Yang
mentioned
there
did not need to be
a motion
or
a
recommendation on the addendum, but a consideration in the process.  
Chair Summa announced that the Commission would move to discussion.  
Vice Chair Chang thanked those behind the scenes for their impressive work. She appreciated
the additional data, such as Page 49. She addressed Packet Page 233 and there being a
significant staffing impact, which translated to budget and implied changes in prioritization. She
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
implored City Council to be realistic in terms of what could be achieved. She noted that
programs did not include planning for transportation, services, etc., which needed to be done, 
which would require re-prioritization of the Housing Element.  
Commissioner
Templeton
appreciated
the
Vice
Chair’s comments. She
specified
that
implementation of the element did not disproportionately impact the quality of life of certain
neighborhoods. She did not know if keeping vacant lots and investment properties off the
market had been addressed. She shared how other communities approached fees.  
Chair Summa declared that discussing fees would need to be agendized.  
Commissioner Lu had considered the tax potential and where it could fit into programs and
asked if there had been consideration of that. He requested staff’s opinion on Palo Alto
Forward as far as feasibility, HIP, timelines, and non-vacant sites and whether it affected the
viability of the current Housing Element for HCD. He questioned what was meant by initiating a
conversation and if the timeline for Program 1.5 could be more aggressive. He echoed Council
Member Burt’s point that there could be potential for office-to-housing conversions in Program
3.10. He asked if there was a commitment to spot zoning along El Camino or other areas and if
consideration had been given to more consistent upzoning as part of the site inventory. He
queried if unit sizes over 1,200 square feet had been considered and if it could have an impact
on developing more units.  
Director Lait noted there was a diagram addressing financial feasibility and a table of PHC-
referenced projects. They had applications that had been filed for prescreening, but most had
not been converted into a planning entitlement and none had converted into building permits. 
The PHZ Program anticipated a number of revisions to development standards, and one related
to affordable housing. PHZ applications required a higher percentage of inclusionary housing, 
extended the requirement to rental units, and had a deeper level of affordability than the
current code. He noted that the Housing Element included policies to increase density in many
districts, and there were regulations to address construction constraints. He outlined there had
not been much result on the HIP and thought there was now enough data to make changes to
the program, which was proposed in the Housing Element, which was not required for RHNA
but was an extension of housing production interests. They envisioned incentives under this
program being more attractive than a development under State Density Bonus. The Housing
Element included a change in that housing projects would be presented to the ARB within 60
days of application submittal, which they envisioned would streamline the application review
process. There was a program in the Housing Element which stipulated ARB Review Board
meetings
would
be reduced to two for
a housing
project. He welcomed
additional
recommendations from the Commission. Initiating conversations for Program 1.5 would entail
reaching out to Stanford and Simon Properties and discussing future interest for housing, which
was a focus on Cycle 7. There was not a focus in Cycle 6 beyond Stanford sites already
identified. He stated there could be a conversation related to zoning. He commented that spot
zoning was not impermissible provided there were certain findings. He noted that there was a
patchwork of opportunity sites along El Camino and explained why the zoning was not uniform. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
Some of the sites identified as upzoning were carryover sites from Cycle 5. He noted that many
properties along El Camino did not have a density restriction. He thought City Council had
addressed coordinated area plans. He believed consideration of areas other than El Camino
should be prioritized. He did not object to Commissioner Lu’s comments regarding zoning, but
it was not included in this Housing Element. Regarding units being over 1,200 square feet, they
initially considered floor area that existed for R1 zoning. A code change would be needed to
allows units over 1,200 square feet, which would go before the PTC, and increases in floor area
could be explored.  
Consultant Weatherby noted that they looked at density in relation to site inventories to plan
for future construction. They were basing feasibility on the base density and what could be
achieved. She detailed what their analysis included.  
Veronica Tam and Associates, Inc., Veronica Tam emphasized that density alone would not
constitute affordable housing. She spoke of the State’s default density enabling subsidies.  
Commissioner Reckdahl believed HCD was interested in AFFH. He voiced that the easiest way to
get affordable housing would be through subsidies, which there was not enough funds for. He
queried if it could be mandated that complexes with more than 20 units require the
acceptation of Section 8 and asked if rent had to be a certain amount under Section 8. He
inquired if the low-income tax credit would require subsidy from the City and if there were
other government programs besides subsidies. He queried if the program providing 25% off
utility bills for low income was significant enough to claim as a housing program. He questioned
if it would be legal to provide subsidies to those who were historically disadvantaged or
discriminated against. He discussed park fees affecting only market rate housing. He addressed
there being spurious data points on Page 468 in the redlined version related to fees and
thought park acquisition fees should be reflected higher. He questioned when a park fee would
be due and if it could be delayed and spread over three years. It felt wrong to charge a fee on
housing when there was a housing shortage and it felt more wrong to not build parks, and he
remarked that both sides needed to be discussed. He thought the park fee section was
inaccurately degrading the Housing Element. He voiced that park fees were addressed in the
HCD letter and thought HCD would return the Housing Element if it was not addressed.  
Assistant City Attorney Yang did not believe apartments could turn down an applicant-based
participation in Section 8 and did not think a particular level of rent could be mandated outside
of the standard previsions of a rent control ordinance. He was not well versed in the details of
the Section 8 Program. The code allowed park fees to be deferred until occupancy of units. He
noted that the analysis on Page 468 addressed possibly constraining housing production.  
Senior Planner Wong clarified that Section 8 had fair market rents, which set maximum rents at
a certain level Section 8 would pay, and Palo Alto rents generally exceeded fair market rent set
by HUD; therefore, certificates could not be used in Palo Alto as market rate rents would not be
covered. He thought it was based on County, not zip code, and landlords would have to lower
rents to accept a Section 8 certificate. He explained that low-income housing tax credits was on
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
a competitive basis through the State, so a public subsidy helped increase competitiveness
during the evaluation, but it was not required. He was not aware of programs for moderate-
income renters, but he had not researched it.  
Director Lait could explore as a housing program the program providing 25% off utilities for low
income. They could include language in the Housing Element, but he did not know how much it
would contribute to HCD’s approval. He expressed that there was a program in place to study
subsidies to those who were disadvantaged or discriminated against, and noted work had not
been done to date. He would be happy to adjust the data points on Page 468. He mentioned
that Program 3.1B included an economic feasibility study to analyze the implications of the park
fee. A park fee would be due [inaudible] building permit. He thought the code provided some
spread of payment, but he was not 100% sure. He would have to look at the standard to
determine if park fees could be spread over three years. He did not believe the park fee section
was degrading the Housing Element and thought the park fee was a possible constraint to
housing that needed to be studied.  
City Attorney Stump declared that the legalities of subsidies to those who were disadvantaged
or discriminated against would be studied.  
Chair Summa thought park fees needed be finalized in a year or two and asked if the issue
would go back to the PTC and then to Council. She indicated that the proposed fee constraint
came from those paying the fee, not residents who benefitted from having a larger park fund to
acquire new land. She suggested Commissioner Reckdahl add park fees to the upcoming
motion.  
Director Lait expressed there was an obligation to identify constraints, and there had been
comments from the public indicating there were impediments, and a study and analysis needed
to take place to determine if the fee was right.  
Commissioner Templeton mentioned that there should be future discussion of park fees. She
appreciated the comments related to ethnic and economic diversity and wanted to clarify that
those comments were meant to be separate issues. She commented that redlining was a
constraint to the historical diversity in Palo Alto. She did not know if it could be addressed in
the Housing Element, but she noted that there was a pursuit to undo diversity lost with
redlining.  
Commissioner Akin thanked staff for their responses to his written questions last week. He was
convinced this was a solid piece of work and that it addressed the State’s concerns and good
faith.  
Commissioner Hechtman thought consideration should sometimes be given to speaking time
for commissioners, particularly in joint meetings. He noted that HCD had tripled the unit
requirement and that the contents of the Housing Element had changed dramatically since the
fifth cycle. He stated that the City was in a reactive mode with respect to HCD. He appreciated
and thanked staff for the redlined version and the matrix they provided in a short amount of
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
time. He opined that the most important thing for the PTC and Council to accomplish was to
end potential exposure to the builder’ s remedy, which could be done by adopting a compliant
Housing Element at this meeting, and then applying it. He noted that amendments were
allowed to occur four times a year. He had not heard commissioners address any substantial
revisions that could delay adoption of the Housing Element. He thought the addendum
adequately analyzed the impacts of the 665-unit Delta. He thought staff had implemented the
revisions recommended by HCD, and that the concerns of HCD were adequately addressed, and
he thought PTC should recommend approval. He had seen a few grammatical errors and typos
and proposed that staff be given the ability to make such edits in a recommendation.  
Chair Summa was not enthused by the Housing Element. She felt it was a series of State laws
and requirements that could hurt more than help the community, and it did not address
affordability. She thought details concerning municipal code changes needed to be addressed
upon it coming back to PTC. She was concerned about air quality near the highway and spoke of
a possible law restricting that. She understood how the environmental review would mitigate
that, but she stated it was a lesser way to live than those not living near the highway. She
worried about creating a second-class area in the city. She thought 83% entitlement from
applications was lower than the normal experience in Palo Alto, and she had heard from senior
staff planners in the past that it was 90% to 95%. The lack of contribution from Stanford stood
out to her. She was concerned about 6.3, but thought details would be resolved in discussions
related to the municipal code. She noted that there would be a discussion related to the data
being based on census tracks, not neighborhoods. She thought some of the demands from the
State, HCD, and RHNA were going to be devastating to staff. She expressed that there would be
discussion in the next year or so when items were returned as municipal code changes. She
asked her colleagues for additional questions or comments or for a motion and a second.  
Planning and Transportation Commission: 
MOTION: Commissioner Chang moved, seconded by Commissioner Hechtman to recommend
the City Council adopt the resolution in Attachment
C adopting the 2023-2031 Housing
Element. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
Chair Summa turned the meeting over to City Council. She asked commissioners to remain in
the meeting as staff wanted there to be a quorum.  
Mayor Kou called the City Council meeting back in session. She thanked staff and the PTC
commissioners for the work done.  
Council Member Veenker recused herself from the first portion of the Housing Element
discussion as she was a homeowner living within 500 feet of First Congregational Church and
provided legal advice to Stanford University on life science patents.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
City Attorney Molly Stump explained that the procedure would be segregated, which was
available in the law. It was a multi-part decision before Council. She explained that Council
Member Veenker had a conflict of interest under the law that required her recusal from a part
of the discussion, so the First Congregational Church and the Stanford-related items should be
discussed during her recusal, and there needed to be full resolution of those items. Council
Member Veenker could then return and the rest of the Housing Element could be discussed, 
but the First Congregational Church and Stanford items could not be revisited at that point. She
could participate in the vote for the Housing Element.  
Council Member Lauing commented that the issue of Stanford was in abeyance, if not closed, 
relative to where the Housing Element stood. He was optimistic that there would be a dialogue
with Stanford. He did not think this meeting should include discussion related to unit quantities, 
for example.  
Council Member Burt understood that Stanford sites would be looked at in the seventh Housing
Element. He believed there would be adjustments to sites in the sixth cycle, and he wanted to
ensure that Stanford locations would be on the list of prospective adjustment sites. He was not
sure if the language needed to be adjusted. He spoke of housing sites in the downtowns and
the El Camino Corridor possibly needing a greater emphasis in the site inventory. He wanted to
ensure that there was an intention to explore other sites within this Housing Element.  
Director Lait specified that nothing in the actions would preclude further examination of the
site inventory and believed there were opportunities for that dialogue.  
Mayor Kou asked how notification had been provided to the neighbors regarding potential use
of the First Congregational Church site.  
Director Lait did not think there had been any site-specific notification other than the general
notification. He remarked that any changes would require a zoning text change, and the code
provided a process for sending notices at that time, which he detailed.  
Mayor Kou declared that the discussion was concluded. She requested Council Member
Veenker return to the dais. She noted that there would be two rounds of questions and
comments.  
Vice Mayor Stone asked if there was data to support the idea that the proposed Middle
Housing Program would lead to affordability that would then result in decreased RCAAs. He
preferred the term less expensive, not more affordable. He questioned if there was anything
requiring ADUs be deed restricted for BMR housing and if the City was able to require BMR
thresholds on private ADUs in certain circumstances. He thought a study was needed related
low income and ADUs. He inquired if there was an estimate as to how much the Housing
Element to this point had cost the City and thought that information would be helpful to reflect
on in the future. He thanked everyone involved in the process. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
Director Lait did not believe there was data to support the idea that the proposed Middle
Housing Program would lead to affordability that would then result in decreased RCAAs. There
was nothing in the programs before Council tonight requiring ADUs be deed restricted for BMR
housing. The did not know the cost of the Housing Element to the City to this point, but he
noted there had been a lot of hours put into it.  
Assistant City Attorney Yang thought there had been a general study done on ADUs in a similar
size range to the units being contemplated and that they tended to be more affordable. He
declared there was limited data. BMR thresholds on private ADUs could be offered as an
incentive, which the PTC and staff had researched and would be part of the ADU item to
Council next week. Alta Housing did not think it was good use of resources. It did not matter to
the State because a percentage of the ADUs would be assumed to be low income, etc.  
Council Member Lauing thanked all for their work on this. He gave staff an opportunity to ask
for more funding for staffing. He queried if implementation was a constraint due to staffing. He
noted that there were costs being incurred by the City related to staffing, which should be
considered. He referenced Sections 4.34 and 4.35 and questioned how housing needs could be
achieved. He asked if the model reflected units per acre needing to be maximized on each
parcel. He asked how to plan better for housing needs.  
Director Lait stated they were working on funding for additional staff. He noted that there were
staffing positions open and that consultant resources would be involved. There were choices to
be made in the budget, and housing initiatives would be balanced with other important services
of the City. They would bring proposals forward for consideration. The model did not indicate
the number of units should be maximized on every new residential project. As for planing
better for housing needs, they could be intentional about zoning standards and offer incentives
for the type of housing the City was interested in building. 
Council Member Burt asked what the higher end unit density was and if providing high density
on the far side of San Antonio and moderate density on the northwest side would require
adjustments in the element. He inquired if the business tax had been referenced in the report
related to funding for affordable housing. Related to potential barriers and park fees, he
thought it would be helpful to reiterate to HCD the challenges presented in communities with
exceptionally high land cost. He queried if the past accomplishments section was focused on
just the last housing element. He spoke of Program 6.7D and this being an opportunity to
redress past practices.  
Director Lait answered that there was an unlimited density for commercial areas. Regarding
high density on the far side of San Antonio and moderate density on the northwest side, he did
not believe a distinction would need to be made now. If it was an interest of Council, staff could
accept guidance. The business tax had been referenced in the report related to funding for
affordable housing.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 21 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
Senior Planner Wong noted that the density per acre was generally 40 but some were 50. He
clarified that the past accomplishments section was focused on the fifth cycle. 
Council Member Veenker agreed with there being lower density in the northwest area of San
Antonio. She spoke of the disproportionate amount of affordable housing in that area and
thought some of it could be redistributed. She referenced Page 3-24 and asked if the factor
analysis related to existing uses. She requested an explanation of using a generalized analysis
related to site inventory, sites converting to housing, non-vacant sites, and existing use, and she
noted that HCD’s guide referenced very specific examples. She asked if examining each site with
the data in the chart had been acceptable to HCD in other instances.  
Senior Planner Wong stated that Page 3-24 was a response to a comment concerning leases
and was to show discontinuance of use. He noted that HCD’s guidance had been published
three years ago, and he thought it provided examples of what would be considered substantial
evidence. He noted that the sites list was available online and that it specified the existing use, 
FAR coverage of a site, when a building had been built, and potentially CoStar information, and
the information applied to each specific site.  
Assistant City Attorney Yang clarified that each underlined heading on Pages 321 through 323
was a different factor used by staff as part of the factor analysis. He did not think that only a
generalized analysis was being done, as each factor was considered for each site. There was
evidence that other jurisdictions had used the same type of analysis, which HCD conceded was
substantial evidence. 
Director Lait noted that properties not meeting the threshold were screened out with the use
of the data. He recognized that examining each site with the data in the chart had been
acceptable to HCD. He spoke of the City not having authority to require and property owners
not having an obligation to submit lease data. For this analysis, staff and consultants had relied
on data that had previously been accepted by HCD.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims thanked all who had played a role in this matter. She spoke of
AFFH, and she proposed there be a declarative statement in the Housing Element related to
Palo Alto’s problematic history with zoning, redlining, and restrictive covenants and that there
be a statement related to undoing these by creating inclusive communities. She referenced the
analysis and felt that the topic of integration and segregation had been largely avoided and
pointed out Pages C36 and 37 concerning RCAAs, and requested the language be changed. She
felt that there was an opportunity to tell a clearer truth about Palo Alto’s history. She discussed
the AFFA wait list being years long, which was not sufficient. She indicated that decisions should
be made to try to reverse income and racial segregation. She discussed why the site inventory
could possibly exacerbate creating concentrated areas of poverty, affluence, and racial isolation
or segregation. She wanted HCD to be informed of Palo Alto’s efforts to educate homeowners
concerning SB 9. She suggested encouraging homeowners to turn single-family homes into as
many as four units on one parcel. She mentioned that there needed to be programs and
policies for historically underrepresented and marginalized groups.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 22 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
Mayor Kou questioned if there was a need for street modifications in the San Antonio area
related to the 101 ramp and if there would be future discussions for a program. She asked what
the park fees funded, if fire mitigation was included, if it maintained open space, and if the fees
funded the park restrooms. She did not want to make light of park fees. She thought the stated
ratio of residents to parklands was in deficit. She asked if having a successful grant application
to receive tax credits to subsidize affordable housing construction would need a subsidy from
the City. She questioned if the City would always have to provide some funding for affordable
or transitional housing. She inquired why there was not an entitlement and pulling of a permit
at the same time. She suggested that permits be pulled upon entitlement with conditions
related to the involvement of ARB. 
Director Lait answered that the street modifications in the San Antonio area was not a part of
the Housing Element. It would be included in the Coordinated Area Plan. The park fees funded
acquisition and improvement of parks and recreational spaces. He did not believe it paid for
recreation fees, but if a tennis court was part of park improvement, it may be covered but not
in the programming. It did not fund maintenance. He indicated that local funding was an
enhancement to a grant application. He spoke of the Charities Housing project, which was a
nonprofit, having no earmarked money from the City. He remarked that the City funding
affordable housing depended on the circumstances, but it was an advantage in grant
application. He spoke of factors involved in entitlement and pulling a permit and developers
possibly delaying a project. He explained why the planning stage did not include review of
construction documents. He specified that the State was interested in streamlining the City’s
process, minimizing the amount of risk, and shortening the process.  
City Manager Ed Shikada clarified that park fees were not used for maintenance purposes. He
noted that fees funding park restrooms was a very specific question, but believed the fees
could fund that.  
Assistant City Attorney Yang commented that broadly park fees covered improvements that
would expand park capacity, which could be new parkland, facilities, etc.  
Senior Planner Wong outlined, regarding grants and tax credits, that it was typical that there be
a subsidy from the City. 
Mayor Kou commented that permits not being pulled upon entitlement with conditions was a
flaw in HCD’s request.  
Council Member Tanaka thanked all for their participation and work related to this topic. He
asked what could be done to change the Housing Element to distribute housing throughout the
city.  
Director Lait outlined that Council could direct staff to redistribute housing throughout the city. 
Adjusting the site inventories could be done but was a pivot and would take six months or more
to make such changes.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 23 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
Assistant City Attorney Yang declared, if the Housing Element was changed related to housing
distribution throughout the city, there could be increased exposure to litigation for not having
adopted a compliant element, the City could lose local control for permitting processes, and
there would be increased exposure to projects under the builder’ s remedy. He clarified if there
was not a certified Housing Element by January 1, 2024, all necessary zoning would need to be
adopted to meet RHNA.   
Council Member Tanaka questioned what could be done for housing distribution outside of the
Housing Element and if the Housing Element could include a statement of intention to
distribute housing throughout the city. He detailed why he thought affordable housing could be
achieved through smaller units, flexible zoning, incentives, and reduced parking requirements. 
He asked what more could be done to help with those issues, especially smaller units. He
wanted to move the staff recommendation plus two amendments in this direction.  
Director Lait answered, related to housing distribution, that the suitable site inventory would
need to be updated.  
City Manager Shikada responded that at this point staff could not provide ideas related to
smaller units, etc.  
Council Member Burt spoke of park impact fees and land acquisition costs and thought adding
land for parks needed to be looked at innovatively. He concurred with Council Member
Lythcott-Haims’ comments related to restrictive covenants. He clarified that they were private
restrictions, which City leadership did not support. He spoke of the impact of Joseph Eichler. He
addressed being in opposition to Prop 14. He did not believe there was an adequate description
of the City’s history in the document and thought it should be accurately reflected and actions
taken to redress it.  
Council Member Lauing indicated that HCD was not concerned with design elements but was
concerned with units, hitting segments of the quotas, building on a sizeable number of the
chosen properties, etc. He thought the downtown corridor near the railroad station should be
considered as a site and noted that there was a lot of site flexibility. He opined that staff did a
good job answering HCD. He proposed approving the Housing Element and letting staff
proceed, as there was time to make changes.  
Vice Mayor Stone mentioned that the document nor the process was perfect. He clarified that
it was the law. He was concerned about liability given there had not been an approved Housing
Element. He asked what percentage of the identified sites were current multifamily housing
sites. He discussed why he felt there would be mass evictions and displacement of renters if
existing multifamily property owners were incentivized to redevelop. He noted there needed to
be a balance to retain residents, prevent displacement, and pursue sites that could increase
housing supply. He suggested acknowledging that local data had not supported the argument
that more housing would drive down prices and suggested there be truth related to
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 24 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
affordability. He was interested in pursuing policies to promote deed-restricted BMR housing
units. He saw the document as one that could be modified to suit the needs of the City.  
Mayor Kou noted that the percentage of the identified sites that were current multifamily
housing sites was on Packet Page 256 of the Addendum to the 2030 Comprehensive Plan
Attachment B.  
Director Lait stated there was between 66 and 88 sites multifamily zoned. 
Senior Planner Wong noted there was approximately 300 total multifamily sites.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims specified it was Council’ s responsibility to encourage and
improve projects that would fulfill the vision. She appreciated
Council Member Burt’s
comments related to racially exclusionary practices in the past and stated there was work to do
in acknowledging that and making amends. She discussed HIP and an expedited review, and she
looked forward to the related changes that would be made. She specified that Council needed
to help constituents understand the need for housing. She was concerned about planned
emergency shelter in ROLM(E) on Embarcadero and East Bayshore, as it was far from stores, 
etc. She indicated that green space and safe routes to school was needed for the GM and ROLM
sites on San Antonio Road. She was inclined to support Council Member Burt’s notion to revise
zoning standards on San Antonio.  
Council
Member
Veenker
remarked
that planning
for housing
was one of the most
consequential things the City could do. She associated herself with Council Members Lythcott-
Haims and Burt with respect to the redlining and the AFFH. She would be happy to second
language Council Member Lythcott-Haims might suggest in the form of an amendment related
to the bottom of Page C36. She looked forward to streamlining the application process of
Program 3.7. She agreed with housing being spread throughout town. She inquired if the site
inventory indicated the affordable sites, which she would like to see done. She queried if there
were specific provisions for seniors, which she hoped could be addressed. She associated
herself with Council Member Lythcott-Haims related to the emergency shelter.  
Senior Planner Wong answered that there were slight limits as to where low-income sites could
be, but they could try to indicate affordable sites on the inventory. He clarified that GM ROLM
was a mixed income area. As for specific provisions, they were including preferences for special
needs but not specifically dedicated to a special needs group, such as seniors.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims thanked Council Member Veenker for the suggestion to
amend the language of the RCAA section. She suggested a friendly amendment and provided
language for amending Page 36, Appendix C regarding redlining practices. 
Discussion ensued regarding the language of the amendment.  
Mayor Kou asked if this amendment would cause a delay, and it was stated that the
amendment would not cause a delay. She thanked the previous Ad Hoc Committee for their
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 25 of 25
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 05/ 08/2023
work. She associated herself with the comments of Chair Summa, Vice Chair Chang, and Vice
Mayor Stone. She noted that there was little evidence that housing elements addressed the
high cost of living and housing affordability. She spoke of the state bills being flawed regarding
the number of housing units that would need to be built. She stated that receiving entitlements
without pulling permits would make approvals ministerial and noted while there could be
public comment there would be nothing elected officials could do. She claimed that deeded
restricted BMRs would be an issue. She indicated that the approximate cost to build a unit was
750K to $1M. She referenced the Home Rule Provision and unfunded mandates. She quoted
from Article 10, Section 5 of the California Constitution. She noted that she did not certify the
2030 Comp Plan EIR, and she would not certify the addendum to the EIR and would not adopt
the Housing Element. In defense of potential litigation, she suggested a peer review related to
potential defense strategies and suggested hiring Aleshire & Wynder, LLP. 
City Council: 
MOTION: Council Member Lauing moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Stone, with consideration of
the addendum to the 2017 Comprehensive Plan Final Environmental Impact Report, to adopt
the resolution in Attachment C adopting the 2023-2031 Housing Element with the revisions
noted by staff in the report and the following additional changes:  
1. Amending the second sentence to read: “ Past discriminatory redlining and lending
practices
prohibiting
non-white
people
from
purchasing
homes
in
certain
neighborhoods are likely contributing factors for these Racially Concentrated Areas of
Affluence (RCAAs). 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Kou no
Adjournment:  
The meeting was adjourned at 11:55 P.M.  
