Page 1 of 29
CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Special Meeting
Monday, March 27, 2023
Call To Order
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely:   
Kou
Absent:   
None
City Clerk Lesley Milton noted all were present.  
Mayor Kou observed a moment of silence for the tragedy that took place in Nashville, 
Tennessee. 
Special Orders Of The Day
1. 
Proclamation for Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta Day 2023
Vice Mayor Stone declared there would be annual recognition of Cesar Chavez and Dolores
Huerta, as well as recognitions of Juneteenth and Armenian Remembrance Day at City Council. 
Next year, they looked to commend Cesar Chavez on or around March 31 and commend
Dolores Huerta on or around April 10. A proclamation was being shared with the community
that honored both leaders for their important coalition-building work in conjunction with other
farm-labor movements to co-found the National Farm Workers Association, which later became
the United Farm Workers Association. They worked to call for better conditions for farm
workers and their families with a mission to reclaim dignity, fair wages, medical coverage, 
benefits, and humane living conditions. They championed a social justice movement that
changed our Nation. Celebration was encouraged through education and community service.  
2. 
Education and Sharing Day
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
Mayor Kou wanted to make sure Rabbi Levin was present. Today the legacy of Rabbi
Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the Lubavitcher Rebbe, was marked a global spiritual leader
and leading advocate for the advancement
of education. The outstanding
and lasting
contributions toward the improvement of education and acts of charity around the world of the
Rebbe were recognized. His legacy continues to inspire individuals to carry forward his
dedication to service and scholarship. She proclaimed Sunday, April 2, 2023, the Rebbe’s 121st
birthday, to be Education and Sharing Day in the City of Palo Alto and called upon everyone to
work together to create a better, brighter, and more promising future for all.  
Rabbi Levin thanked Mayor Kou and City Council members. It was an honor for him to accept
the proclamation marking Education and Sharing Day on April 12. He spoke of being blessed to
be a rabbi for 42 years in Palo Alto. Palo Alto’s schools were renowned around the world; 
therefore, it was appropriate to mark Education and Sharing Day. He spoke of his mentor, 
Menachem Mendel Schneerson, being the most influential rabbi in modern history and placing
great emphasis on education for all. The U.S. Congress had honored him by designating this day
in 1978 as Education Day, which every following U.S. President declared this day as a day to
refocus efforts on education, sharing, and creating a brighter future for society. The rabbi
encouraged world leaders and educators to place great importance on education as a means to
build good character and increase awareness of moral and ethical values, which was the
foundation of a moral and unified society. He spoke of current events and the power to
actualize the ability of goodness and the quest for kindness and peace being greater than
before. The rabbi taught that every individual could have an impact. As there were acts of
violence and destruction, there were also small acts of random goodness and kindness by
ordinary people. A positive education could change the course of society for the better. He
asked God to bless the efforts to bring greater eduction and more goodness and kindness to the
world.  
Mayor Kou asked Rabbi Levin to step on the dais for a picture with the Council.  
Public Comments
There were no public comments. 
Study Session
3. 
Review and Provide Feedback on a Term Sheet with Pets in Need for Operation of the
Palo Alto Animal Shelter; CEQA status – not a project.  
Mayor Kou declared there would be a staff presentation followed by a presentation from Pets
In Need (PIN).  
Director of Community Services Kristen O’Kane furnished slides and commented this was a
study session to share where they were in negotiating a new contract with PIN. They would
present the draft Term Sheet. She provided background for new Council members. She
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
discussed the terms of the past and current agreement. The current contract with PIN would
expire May 15, 2023. She spoke of Council previously passing the motion to continue good faith
negotiations with PIN, to extend the Notice of Termination, to pursue a fundraising program, 
and explore the transition to a new database, and it added additional items related to new
kennels, etc. She outlined key terms that had been negotiated related to scope of service, 
trap/ neuter/ return (TNR) policy, animal welfare, corrective action plan in lieu of penalties, and
PIN possibly doing their own improvements with their fundraising. She presented a slide
comparing scope of work in the current agreement to the proposed Term Sheet. She noted it
would take time to get to a resolution in terms of a TNR policy and that it would require
additional
staffing. She provided
a slide comparing
annual
compensation
and capital
improvements under the current and the proposed agreement and a slide summarizing
increases in costs, capital investment, and potential funding sources. Alternate service delivery
models were in the staff report and the presentation. She specified ways cities could achieve
providing animal shelter and animal control services. She spoke of a cost increase to
compensation to PIN and provided rough estimates for operating the shelter in-house. If
Council wanted this investigated further, a deeper dive into short- and long-term costs for the
City would be needed. If an agreement had not been reached by the expiration of the contract
in May, PIN would be interested in extending it if negotiations were heading in the right
direction. They would return to Council with the appropriate recommendation
based on
Council’ s feedback.  
PIN CEO Laura Tool Gardner was a few days new on the job. She spoke of there having been a
transformation in leadership at PIN. She voiced their mission. She discussed her background, 
being an animal lover, and what she offered PIN. She introduced the new leadership team, 
including the Director of Shelter Medicine, Director of Shelter Operations, and Director of
Finance/ Interim Executive Director, which was assembled by the Board of Directors. She
introduced
Board President
Rob Calman and Interim Executive Director Valerie Wilson
McCarthy. She addressed focusing on community service, access to quality care, education, and
outreach.  
PIN Staff Terry Dunnwood remarked there had been negotiation over the last several months
with City staff. She explained why PIN was proposing an increased rate to the City. She
emphasized that fees to community members would remain the same or only very slightly
increase. She addressed the budget they had prepared and the investment required. She
shared a slide of a data analysis from 2014 to 2023 YTD for impounds, adoptions, etc. She spoke
of the importance of the foster and outreach programs and the Behavior staff. The budget
specifics demonstrated their approach to running the shelter. She commented on TNR being
the most effective way to manage feral cat populations, but it was a complex issue with much
to consider. They would take a science-based approach in reducing the feral cat population and
requested that all continue to work together to examine possible adaptations to the current
agreement over the course of the five-year contract. She shared some testimonials. She
declared that they had community education programs free to the City of Palo Alto.  
Public Comments
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
KC Hetterly expressed that feeding stations for feral cats presented problems, and she shared a
video clip. 
Virginia Feira (in person) voiced why she believed the metrics and service offerings in the new
draft agreement were outdated. She addressed transferring adoptable animals from partner
shelters and there being rescue shelters providing opportunities for adoption. She was opposed
to subsidizing adoption costs and supported subsidizing post-adoption. She proposed a voucher
system for spaying and neutering. She opined that other coordinated services were needed in
addition to shelters.  
Rani Fischer (in person) spoke against TNR and asked that it not be supported.  
Shani Kleinhaus (in person) stated she and SCVAS strongly opposed TNR. She was not in favor of
cat-feeding stations.  
Eileen McLaughlin was representing the Citizens Committee to Complete the Refuge. She had
sent Council comments focusing on considering a TNR program that would not be determined
through a stakeholder. She asked that science be incorporated into the decision-making. She
referenced the University of Florida peer-reviewed study examining other studies regarding
TNR and suggested folks read it. 
Annie Yang, Chair of the Environment Action Committee of the SCVAS, indicated why she was
concerned with facing biodiversity loss, habitat loss, and fragmentation related to TNR. She
claimed that TNR did not work and requested TNR programs not be supported.  
Carole Hyde, retired Executive Director of the Palo Alto Humane Society, supported the TNR
policy for cats. She mentioned studies and cited an example from the Stanford Cat Network, 
which had been worked out with Environmental Health and Safety at Stanford. She stated that
forbidding TNR promoted euthanasia. She addressed regulation not being needed in the
Baylands as there was an ordinance forbidding feeding cats. She suggested there be an
information campaign for those with family owned pets.  
Leonor Delgado, former Education Manager for Palo Alto Humane Society, had been involved in
TNR efforts since 2001. She clarified why rescuers and TNR folks on the peninsula supported
TNR programs. It was important to educate residents about the value of spay/ neuter and make
it possible for lower income pet owners and rescuers to access low-cost services. They
supported barring cats from areas designated to protect wildlife. She requested support of
PIN’s initiative to make TNR the designated policy for community cats.  
Carmen Rodwellz asked the Council to think about what the City of Palo Alto needed for a
shelter, which she believed was different than what was provided. She thought the community
was getting very little support from the shelter. She did not understand why dogs were being
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
brought in from other places for adoption. She thought the City needed a shelter that provided
services, such as spay and neuter, etc., and the shelter to partner with vets in town. She
requested there be enforcement of dog licenses, which could be a source of revenue. She asked
how Los Altos and Los Altos Hills was involved financially in supporting the shelter.  
Mayor Kou requested Eileen McLaughlin resend her document, as she could not open it.  
Council Member Burt was concerned there would not be ample time to address this item and
other items on the agenda.  
City Manager Ed Shikada noted that the study session was to get feedback from the Council and
that no decisions were expected. Staff would take the feedback and determine how best to
take next steps.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims seconded Council Member Burt’s concern.  
Council Member Burt was surprised by the doubling of the proposed subsidy to PIN, and before
moving toward a decision, he wanted to see a breakdown of the different drivers related to the
cost increase. He questioned why there needed to be staffing increases and what had changed
from 2019 when the contract was entered into; to what extent PIN’s fundraising materialized; 
where the trapped cats were being released; and if there was an estimate of the number of
feral cats in or near the Baylands. He requested an update on Mountain View’s policy. On
follow-up, the Council needed better understanding of what was happening in neighboring
communities.  
Director O’Kane detailed differences in the original negotiations with PIN, which included a
significant fundraising effort and salaries.  
Animal Control Officer Cody McCartney indicated that the City was not trapping cats without
resident approval. If a City Animal Control officer were to trap a cat, there needed to be
permission from the resident to release. PIN was handling the facilitation of that, and the City
did not release cats at this time. There were a handful of feral cats and colonies in or near the
Baylands. He discussed Mountain View’s policy. He did not have a current update, but strides
had been made since Silicon Valley Animal Control Authority took over. If they were not
trapping and releasing, the feral cats were just there or rescue groups were moving them to
places they could reside.   
Council Member Veenker noted she had wanted to speak about the concerns of having ample
time to address this item. She did not think TNR needed to be the focus of this conversation
and hoped an independent decision could be made about the contract, its renewal, and how
animals would be sheltered and that a separate decision be made about TNR. On that basis, she
was setting aside her questions about TNR. She inquired regarding the financial numbers why
per capita was the relevant denominator and if per capita meant per human or per visit; if
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
animals outside the area were part of the pet adoption mission; and if unadoptable animals
were turned away. 
PIN Dunnwood specified a similar analysis could be done in terms of the number of animals
processed, etc. They had looked at per capita in terms the number of citizens, responsibility of
helping animals, etc. She addressed the differences in services provided by PIN and Peninsula
Humane Society. She addressed who they partnered with in bringing animals in, but those costs
were not included in the budget presented to City staff. The numbers presented were for in-
jurisdiction only. Unadoptable animals were not turned away.  
Police Captain James Reifschneider noted that the scope of services was different for each, 
which he explained. They were not sure if the PIN charges were inclusive of the things PIN was
not providing.   
Council Member Lauing asked how many feral cats there were; what Animal Control did and did
not do; if PIN was billed separately; and if other cities could be contacted to determine interest
in using services. He was not clear why the possible revenue of $425K would apply to the City’s
proposal only, as fees could be negotiated if somebody else were to do it. He asked if labor
costs included benefits, retirement, etc. He inquired if PIN’s management problems had been
addressed and if the proposal included more labor and skilled labor.   
Officer McCartney indicated further research would have to be done related to the number of
feral cats. He did not have an accurate count and it fluctuated year to year. He explained the
role of Animal Control for Palo Alto, Los Altos, and Los Altos Hills. Labor costs did not include
pension liability but did include annual benefits, and compensation costs were built in. He
indicated how they arrived at that number.  
Director O’Kane commented that the City billed Los Altos and Los Altos Hills, and she outlined
the fees received from them. No other municipalities had been contacted to determine interest
in using services so additional revenue could be generated.  
Captain Reifschneider acknowledged there were plenty of cities in the county that could be
partners, but he could not say any were committed. He discussed fees and the possible revenue
of $425K.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims queried what PIN’s revenue had been per year for the last five
years; if PIN served other municipalities besides Palo Alto, Los Altos, and Los Altos Hills; and
what percentage of their operating budget was devoted to serving animals from Palo Alto. She
requested there be a future conversation related to euthanasia. She asked what kind of
outreach was currently being done regarding not feeding feral cats.  
PIN Dunnwood declared that the budget over the last five years averaged between $500M and
600M a year. All financial statements were on their website. They had city contracts with Palo
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
Alto, Los Altos, and Los Altos Hills. The percentage serving Palo Alto was approximately one-
quarter for the contract of their total budget as an organization.  
Officer McCartney described the education and outreach being done regarding feral cats. 
PIN Director of Shelter Medicine Dr. Margaret Leaderman Jones addressed their live release
rate and some circumstances involving euthanasia. They had a no-kill philosophy, but there was
also an obligation to place only safe animals in the community. She touched on feral cats and
TNR versus two other options, which were trap and euthanize versus trap and neuter/ spay. She
discussed them not having a fully defined TNR policy.  
Council Member Tanaka thought raising fees to cover cost should be considered. He asked if
the nonresident fee was higher than the Palo Alto fee. He thought other cities should be
brought on board, and if they did not want to come aboard, their fees should be raised. When
this item returned to Council, he wanted to see a side-by-side comparison between the PIN
proposal and the City’s proposal and that the City factor in pension costs, etc., which would
reflect the total absolute cost. He thought the City should get other bids. He queried why there
was a capital cost increase for PIN but not for the City’s proposal. 
Director O’Kane remarked they had not gone through an exercise regarding raising fees, but her
instinct was that the costs would be astronomical to residents. She discussed the capital cost
increase for PIN, which included space shortage and other municipalities being brought in. 
PIN Dunnwood indicated that fees for adoptions, veterinary services, etc., were a small part of
their revenue and the fee to the City was larger. Regarding raising fees, she specified that
adoption and veterinary fees would have to be raised, which would undercut providing low-
cost services. Nonresident fees for certain services were higher.  
Captain Reifschneider addressed why the City model did not include a capital cost increase. 
Mayor Kou inquired if the animal shelter functioning under the police department was the right
model and if other shelters did the same; how cruelty investigations were handled when the
City managed them; and the role and involvement of the Animal Control officers in relation to
the animal shelter functions, if their office was at the shelter and if there was staff at the
shelter. She requested there be a comparison chart with the other cities when the item
returned to Council, which would compare the cost for a veterinarian and staff for the
alternative model of returning it to City management. She asked that consideration be given to
hiring residents. She thought about reaching out to UC Davis for input. She believed it was
important that operating hours/ holidays be posted at the facility and on the PIN and the Palo
Alto websites. She discussed TNR being a difficult issue. She asked where releases were done. 
She hoped PIN and the City would work together to implement a TNR policy. She discussed
implications of one species taking over another.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
Captain Reifschneider noted that San Jose was the only other full-service shelter under police
department oversight, but other cities used a joint power authority, so it was not inconsistent
with models operated by other cities. When the City was handling cruelty investigations, it was
done by City veterinary staff, Animal Control, and police officers. The proposed model specified
it would come out of the City’s budget and would be in addition to what was being paid to PIN, 
so additional funding would need to be allocated on an annual basis if a veterinarian was
needed.  
City Manager Ed Shikada expressed that an in-house model could be looked at if Council
desired. The operation in San Jose was by Parks, Recreation, and Neighborhood Services
Department or Public Works.  
Officer McCartney
indicated that they worked alongside
PIN staff to facilitate
shelter
operations, but shelter operations were done by PIN and field operations by Animal Control. 
The Animal Control offices are at the shelter. They did not have 24-hour staff at the shelter, but
there were several 12-hour shifts. 
Vice Mayor Stone inquired if PIN had a policy for not releasing cats in sensitive areas, such as
the Baylands, etc., and if PIN provided education to people coming in the shelter. He requested
the TNR policy preclude release in sensitive areas.  
Director
Leaderman
Jones
explained
that
residents
trapped
the
cats, the
cats were
spayed/ neutered, and then given back to the residents for management. They had not yet
developed a policy with the City. They had not been proactive in asking if cats were in sensitive
areas, but they could be. She explained the process of residents bringing cats in being held as
strays and being transferred to other areas/ organizations or euthanized. The 98% live release
rate was not specific to feral cats but included all animals. They educated adopters and
caregivers. Education could be a big part of the TNR policy, but there was not yet an official
policy. PIN would support a TNR policy precluding release in sensitive areas.  
City Manager Shikada expected their next step to be meeting with PIN and answering Council’ s
questions and coming back with additional information.  
Council Member Burt did not understand why the capital commitments
could not be
determined before signing the agreement. He discussed perspective capital needs PIN had
referenced should there be expanded service. He asked if there was an indication of Mountain
View being interested in coming back in. PIN had mentioned looking at capital needs as
contingency planning for that possibility. He was concerned about a letter in the packet from
DPS Rescue regarding rescue surgeries being reduced and not having access to surgical beds the
City paid for. As there was no TNR program for stray dogs, he queried why cats were released
but not dogs. On return to Council, he wanted to understand resources devoted toward
supporting rescue animals coming into the area versus some of the local services.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
Director O’Kane commented on the original agreement and additional expenses. They could
attempt to determine the capital commitments prior to signing the agreement, but there would
be risk of it changing.  
City Manager Shikada voiced there was not an indication that Mountain View was interested in
coming back in.  
City Manager Shikada stated regarding anticipated capital projects that he thought PIN was
responding to Council’ s suggestion and that it was not a proposal of PIN. He would follow up
after the meeting regarding the letter from DPS Rescue. 
PIN Director of Shelter Operations Laura Birdsall provided reasons why cats were released but
not dogs, and one was public safety.  
Council Member Veenker was opposed to considering shelter services outside Palo Alto. She
asked why there would not need to be additional capital for the City’s proposal and if kennels
needed to be built in addition to those originally contemplated. She requested an explanation
of the 2015 RFP being revenue neutral and now paying $ 1M+ per year. Regarding public
comments related to not being able to get appointments, etc., she inquired if PIN was offering
volume and scope of services to meet needs.  
Captain Reifschneider stated that staff, to include Animal Control staff, was confident there was
not a capacity issue.  
Director Birdsall indicated they did not need more housing but bigger and better housing, 
including indoor/ outdoor kennels. 
Director O’Kane commented it came directly out of the audit that the shelter could never be
revenue neutral. She did not know if becoming revenue neutral was a goal of the City and
declared there had always been some subsidy. There were also findings in the audit related to
compensation, facility, etc.  
Director Leaderman Jones expressed that changes had been made to ensure residents were
prioritized for spay and neuter services. Once they determined their jurisdiction, they found
they were easily able to meet the demand quickly and without much delay. The wait time was a
few weeks at the most. There was more demand outside jurisdiction than they could meet in a
timely manner. They screened for income need out of jurisdiction but not in jurisdiction. She
believed vaccine clinics were readily available.  
Council Member Lauing queried if 60 spay/ neuter surgeries per month, referenced on Packet
Page 16, was accurate and if there should be reference to minimum/ maximum transactions to
protect PIN on the maximum side. He discussed and supported outsourcing to cut cost. He
preferred not to be committed to five years, so the new management team, etc., could be
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
evaluated. He spoke of the efforts being made to be open 40 hours a week and the City needing
to see performance in the first year or two of the contract.  
Captain Reifschneider commented there were slides with historical data of the procedures
done by the City prior to PIN taking over.  
Vice Mayor Stone was concerned of losing some services and being asked to pay almost double. 
He questioned the location of the closest after-hours veterinary care, if there was after-hours
care for non-stray animals at PIN, and the frequency of veterinary services for cruelty
investigations. He requested the proposed contract be modified to reflect that PIN would
provide required vet services if PIN had the necessary staffing level. He questioned how the City
intended to enforce service agreements if PIN was not fulfilling contractural agreements, since
there were no monetary penalties. He was interested in reducing the contract term to allow for
evaluation. He thought an in-house model was worth pursuing but questioned if staff wanted
such a model. He addressed an in-house model and the audit warning of infracture issues. He
did not think this was a question about keeping the service in Palo Alto but was a matter of it
being in-house or through PIN.  
Officer McCartney answered that the closest after-hours veterinary care was Med Vet on
Showers Drive in Mountain View. Currently PIN paid the bill for wildlife and after-hours vet
care. After-hours care for non-stray animals was not being provided through MedVet, but
services were provided to animals when an owner had not been identified and to wildlife. The
frequency of veterinary services for cruelty investigations was low. Going forward, it would
need to be outsourced to a specialized vet, which would be a cost to the City.  
Director O’Kane declared there were no penalties imposed against PIN in the current
agreement for not meeting requirements. They were hoping to be more collaborative in
problem-solving and identifying contractural obligations.  
City Manager Shikada remarked their priority was to ensure service be provided. They would
bring to Council cost estimates to bring it in house and the service implications. Long-term
liabilities needed to be considered, such as pensions, and they would provide that information
to Council. They could not currently give a solid in-house/ outsource recommendation and
would take Council’ s feedback and see what could be done to ensure needs would be met.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims noted she had more questions and comments, but she would
not address those in the respect of time.  
Vice Mayor Stone closed the study session.  
Agenda Changes, Additions And Deletions
City Manager Ed Shikada declared the order of action items should read 9, 11, 10 on the
amended agenda printed in pink, which was subject to Council redirection.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
Public Comment
Aram James did not understand why public comment had been reduced to two minutes. He
spoke of the progression of AB 742. He would send Council a rough draft of prepared
comments by Sergeant Sean Allen. He opined that metal detectors were needed and that gun
permits should not be limited.  
Talya Schube, a member of PASCC, supported the City’s carbon neutrality goal and requested
more be invested into sustainability. She referenced the recent IPCC report. She mentioned
that Palo Alto did not have a Sustainability Department.  
Consent Calendar
4. 
Approval of Minutes from March 13, 2023 Meeting
5. 
Adopt an Ordinance to Expand the Human Relations Commission ( HRC) from Five to
Seven Members; CEQA status – not a project
6. 
Consent of the Macias, Gini & O’Connell’ s Single Audit Report for the Fiscal Year Ended
June 30, 2022 Consent Questions
7. 
Approval of Amendment No. 1 with FolgerGraphics, Inc. to increase the Not-to-Exceed
Amount by $ 235,200 for Professional Printing and Distribution Services of the Enjoy
Activity Guide for an Additional Three Years; CEQA Status – not a project. Consent
Questions
8. 
Approval of Contract Amendment Number One (1) with Team Sheeper, Inc., Authorizing
One-Time Payment not-to-exceed $ 85,000 for Salaries Associated with the Rinconada
Pool 45-day Closure for Replastering; CEQA status – not a project Consent Questions
Public Comment
Hsinya Shen commented on Item 5 and noted the PAC had not yet meet regarding it. She
outlined why she was requesting Council expand the item to equally increase the membership
of HRC and PAC from five to seven members. 
Loren Gordon specified why she was asking Council to consider restoring the Public Art
Commission to a seven-member commission.  
Aram James spoke of the reduction of public participation in HRC and requested the HRC and
PAC commissions be expanded to seven members. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Stone moved, seconded by Council Member Lauing to approve Agenda
Item Numbers 4-8. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Numbers 7-8. 
MOTION PASSED 4, 5, 6: 7-0
MOTION PASSED 7, 8: 6-1, Tanaka No
Council Member Tanaka noted, regarding Item 7, that his research indicated people did not use
the printed catalogues and addressed the increased cost and environmental waste of the
catalogues and suggested using URL codes on catalogues to track usage. It was hard for him to
see a return on investment on Item 8. He voiced why he did not think the City should pay
private companies’ employees. He questioned the effectiveness of the proposal in terms of
timing and being halfway through the closing period. He questioned usage in the rainy and cold
weather. He wondered if the money could have been used for other services that could have
benefitted more people.  
The Council took a 10-minute break] 
City Manager Comments
City Manager Ed Shikada noted that staff was continuing to monitor conditions of the expected
storm and outlined what the forecast indicated. Due to likely conditions, open space preserves
would be closed on March 28. They had received comments from the California Department of
Housing Community Development on the City’s Draft Housing Element, which staff was
reviewing and would be making revision recommendations to PTC and City Council. That
meeting was tentatively scheduled for May 8. He commented that the Neighborhood Town Hall
was well attended. They would begin work on the next quarterly Neighborhood Town Hall, and
City Council would have a broad discussion related to community engagement on April 10. 
There would be a virtual community meeting on March 30 regarding the rental registry. He was
seeking feedback from Council and the community regarding City Manager comments, and a
survey form was available at cityofpaloalto. org/ citymanagerupdates, and there would be more
opportunities in subsequent reports. Upcoming Council meetings: On April 3, there would be
discussions on automated license plate recognition technology, PRC’ s recommendation on the
Measure E site, and State and Federal legislation. Scheduled for April 10 was the Community
Engagement Study Session with a follow-up discussion, hopefully with Council prioritizing
objectives and Council/ Committee workplans. On April 17, there were to be recommendations
from the Finance Committee on gas and electric rates for the year beginning July 1, 2023
through 2024. On May 1, there was to be a presentation on the proposed budget that would
lead to Finance Committee hearings as well as the annual community development Block Grant
annual action plan.  
Mayor Kou requested that deadlines for adopting the Housing Element be provided to the
Council and PTC.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
City Manager Shikada noted they were beyond the date and susceptible to the builder’s
remedy, and they were trying to complete the revised Housing Element as quickly as possible. 
He would provide dates and as much specificity as possible within that context.   
Council Member Lythcott-Haims thought the City was due for an evaluation of the tree
ordinance evaluation and inquired if there was a date for that or if one could be set.  
City Manager Shikada would follow up regarding a date for the evaluation of the tree
ordinance. 
Action Items
9. 
Approval of a Purchase Order with Interstate Truck Center in an Amount Not to Exceed
297,244 for the Purchase of Two 2023 International CV Chipper Body Trucks, utilizing a
Cooperative Purchase Agreement, Funded by Capital Improvement Program Project VR-
23000
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston outlined that the item was about the purchase of four
chipper body trucks, which were included in the FY2023 vehicle and equipment replacement
capital project. The report was republished from the February 13 agenda and included
supplemental information regarding timing of the purchase order and other medium and
heavy-duty truck replacements that would be needed in the next several years. Upon approval
of the purchase order, it would take 12 to 24 months to place new trucks in service. He outlined
what the vehicle replacement plans over the next three fiscal years envisioned. There were not
EV options available for most of these vehicles, but it was an area of focus. In future Staff
Reports, they were planning to include recommendations for discussion related the availability
of EV options. Staff recommended approval of the purchase order.  
Council Member Veenker thanked staff for watching for opportunities to bring EVs into the
fleet. Having received information in the last few days, she did not believe suitable EV versions
of the trucks were available, and she withdrew her concern related to purchasing EV trucks. She
suggested future Staff reports address the availability of EVs. She was concerned about
committing to diesel trucks for 20 years and proposed adding to the Sustainability and Climate
Action Plan an effort to evaluate whether some of the fleet could be replaced with EVs at
appropriate times.  
Public Comment
There were no requests to speak. 
Council Member Burt would like consideration to be given to future technologies of major
vehicle purchases.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
Council Member Tanaka asked for information related to the truck crash. He was interested in
extending how long it is out of commission because it would be less ecological waste in terms
of scrapping something. He asked how the truck being out of commission affected operations. 
He questioned if this truck needed immediate replacement, as the crew had been functioning
without it, and suggested waiting for the availability of an EV or purchase 1 truck, so there
would be 4, but not replace the 22-year-old truck. He requested the mileage of the older
functional trucks and the typical mileage for the life of a truck. He believed it made sense to get
one truck, but he did not know if it made sense to replace all the trucks.  
Public Works Fleet Manager Danitra Balman provided details regarding the truck accident. She
remarked that the trucks in service were 20+ years old, and there were mechanical problems
with the trucks. It was unlikely there would be an EV option in the next year or two. 
Mainstream manufacturers had not indicated EVs were in the works. They could postpone
replacement, but there were issues with the other two trucks aging out. The mileages of the
trucks were 51,000 and 70,000 miles.  
Director Eggleston believed the truck had been out of commission since March 2022 and
addressed how that had affected operations. It did not have an impact when there were job
vacancies, but now being fully staffed, it would mean one less crew. Regarding waiting to
replace the truck, they would like to have the equipment and utilize full staffing. The truck
replacement guideline was 10 years or 100K miles, whichever came first. He explained that
mileage was not a good indicator for truck life. He was concerned it may take 2 years to put a
truck in place, and there were 2 additional 22-year-old trucks. They did not recommend
delaying replacement even though they were looking for EV opportunities. 
Assistant Public Works Director Mike Wong explained why mileage was not a good indicator for
truck life. They were able to manage without one truck because they did not have full staffing, 
but they were impacted severely by not having all trucks available.  
Council Member Veenker questioned if one truck could be purchased and one leased.  
Fleet Manager Balman did not know of any such specialized equipment being available for
lease.  
Mayor Kou noted that there had a hold by the vendor on the price and asked if the price
remained the same since there had been a delay. She asked the price of an electric truck and
for an explanation of a cooperative purchase agreement. 
Director Eggleston specified that the hold the vendor provided was verbal through the previous
Council date. If Council approved the purchase order, they would need to reach out to the
vendor. He envisioned the price increasing, but there was a small amount of contingency in the
recommendation that he hoped would be enough to cover any increases. As for the price of an
electric truck, there were not electric trucks of this type. Some of the information that had been
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
tracked for other electric truck chassis indicated a price double or more than internal
combustion models. 
Fleet Manager Balman explained a cooperative purchase agreement.  
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to
approve and authorize the City Manager or their designee to execute a purchase order with
Interstate Truck Center LLC dba Valley Peterbilt in the amount of $270,244 and an approximate
10% contingency in the amount of $27,000 for potential price increases, for a total not to
exceed amount of $297,244 for the purchase of two (2) 2023 International CV515 trucks with
chipper bodies, utilizing a cooperative purchase agreement via Sourcewell, a cooperative
purchasing agency serving government and not-for-profit organizations. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka No
11.  
Provide Direction on Permanent Parklet Program Regulations and Proposed Ordinance
and Approval of Budget Amendments in the General Fund, CEQA status – categorically
exempt (15301 and 15304(e)). (Continued from March 13, 2023) 
Planning and Development Services Director Jonathan Lait discussed
some
history
of
the
Permanent Parklet Program discussions and directions. Regarding safety, K-rail would be most
effective in deterring vehicle intrusions in parklet areas. He addressed planters and noted that
parklets were oriented to pedestrian- oriented areas and where speed limits were 25 MPH. Of
the cities that had been studied, parklet design standards varied significantly. They could
continue to explore the issue based on Council’ s direction. It seemed Council was heading
toward a permissive use of propane in the parklets. He described the technical considerations
related to propane use and storage, and he wanted to ensure safety considerations would be
addressed in the standards. There was insufficient drainage with the existing parklet designs, 
and new standards should ensure there would be efficient flow of water. They were looking
Council’ s guidance on the size and scale of parklets, parking, heaters, the license fee and how to
charge for use of the public right of way, and the cleaning fee. He discussed why staff
recommended there be no cleaning fee. He reminded Council that there had been typos on
Packet Pages 94 and 91 from the presentation by Urban Planning Partners, Inc., Associate
Planner Hannah Chan Smyth a couple weeks ago. There had been a new parklet established or
modified that had glass window panes, which staff had not anticipated as part of the standards, 
and there did not seem to be support for glass being in the public right of way, so staff would
like to adjust the standards to prohibit glass from being part of an enclosed parklet.  
Public Comments
Brad Ehikian, a partner with Premier Properties, thought a permanent program was necessary
but wanted a well thought through design and suggested there be a pause on the permanent so
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
the work staff and Streetsense was conducting could be focused on. He thought this was a
temporary program that would require annual renewals.  
Guillaume Bienaimé commented on the importance of parklets and outdoor dining. He
suggested waiting for the master plan to give all time to prepare and plan for parklets. He
addressed the opportunity for Ramona Street. He spoke of high licensing fees referenced in the
report.  
Roxy Rapp spoke of historical events that had made downtown successful. He was not anti-
restaurants or anti-outdoor seating, but he wanted a sensible plan and a great landscape
architect hired. He addressed Ramona Street being an historical street.  
Aram James voiced his frustration related to public speaker time and encouraged all to adhere
to the allotted time. He thought the goal was to have as many parklets as possible while being
cognizant of the business owners’ interest, not overcharging, and making safe streets.  
Stina Berglund worked at Nordic Innovation House, which was also a meeting space. They
wanted to create a meeting space outside their office that was not commercial and requested a
permit to allow such. Through the Street Moves project, they would like to use a building kit
that consists of an expandable wooden platform with modular parts that can be used in many
different ways. This kit would give cities like Palo Alto more public space for people, rather than
cars and vehicle traffic. The kits are inspired by the way cities like San Francisco have turned
unused areas in the city into small parks.  
Mayor Kou requested Council speak on Director Lait’s first slide and address the specifics
provided by him.  
Council Member Lauing thought the ordinance should take into account store frontage being
larger or smaller than parking space and liberalism related to areas not facing other stores. He
noted that the visibility issue seemed to be related to the height of the parklet and opined that
a letter of approval from the landlord or retailer may not be needed if there was visibility of
storefronts from the street and sidewalk. Regarding stopping the parklet process and designing
a downtown area plan, there had been no funding for a downtown plan, and it could take 5 to
10 years. He addressed the safety and aesthetic issues of having temporary parklets for up to
seven years. He did not understand the economics of staff favoring gas heaters and suggested
incenting electric and staying on board with 80 X 30 even it meant reducing fees. He
understood why there needed to be an initial application requirement, but he did not
understand the renewal. He was glad to see cleaning would be done by the tenants. He
indicated why he believed the lease rent should be reasonable and not a fee. He was supportive
of item number 2 on Slide 6.  
Council Member Tanaka thought a permanent plan should have people focused on providing
sufficient bathroom space and ensuring safety instead of temporary parklets, which were
leaving people in limbo. He discussed that it would be more economical if the City did the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
cleaning. He thought Council had to be careful with licensing fees and that it should not be
more expensive than indoor space.  
Council Member Burt queried how long of a term the designs and investments were being
considered for and if it would be several years before there would be a permanent streetscape
design, which could require modifications to parklets. He asked for an explanation of K-rail. He
asked if glass would be allowed. He voiced it was necessary to have adequate safety measures. 
He wanted to ensure people were being driven toward electrification but recognized it would
take time. He concurred with Council Member Lauing regarding parklet size. Occupancy could
be estimated no matter the size. He wanted parklets to be available but that they not infringe
on neighboring
businesses. He did not believe there needed to be permission of the
neighboring business or property owner if a parklet had tables only and was without a
structure. He did not want a fee structure that would discourage parklets.  
Director Lait felt permanent parklet standards was not a great title. They were in a hodgepodge
space, and they wanted to add uniformity, which could change and adapt over time.  
Public Works Assistant Director Holly Boyd noted that the parklet program could be five to
seven years as the streetscape project was five to seven years out. They suggested not allowing
glass and discussed staff’s concerns. Plexiglass could be allowed.  
City Manager Ed Shikada outlined that K-rail was also known as Jersey barriers, basically
concrete barriers.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims acknowledged
that there needed to be a process for
something bigger, intentional, and more visionary, but that was not this conversation. 
Regarding the letter of consent, she was concerned that landlords could dictate what could be
done on public land. She liked the right of first refusal if the adjacent tenant, not landlord, was
the decision maker. She was concerned that a few landlords owning multiple properties could
be making decisions for the City. She asked staff if the issue of a vacancy tax on vacant
commercial properties could come to Council and if it could be on an agenda. She did not think
vacancies were a result of parklets but that it was high rent.  
Vice Mayor Stone was glad to see support for the right of first refusal. He did not believe
property owners should dictate what the City should do with public space. Regarding parking
being two parallel or three angled spots, he would like “ or the length of the storefront” added
to the language, and going beyond the storefront would require the right of first refusal by the
store owner, not the property owner. Some property owners had brought up lack of visibility of
their storefront due to rooftops, etc., and he thought those impediments should be removed. 
He did not want fees to be done in a way that would impede the recovery of the vitality of the
areas. He promoted adoption of electric heaters. He asked if the City could finance electric
heaters and businesses make monthly payments. He liked staff’s cleaning fee proposal. He
queried what would happen if there were issues of uncleanliness.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
Assistant Director Boyd outlined that part of the halftime FTE task was to monitor and do
cleaning enforcement. She would have to work with the Attorney’ s office on language
regarding fines, etc.  
Vice Mayor Stone thought work should be done with the Attorney’ s office regarding cleaning
fines, etc. He was in favor of reducing the fees associated with renewals, but the right of first
refusal needed to be included.    
Assistant
Director
Boyd commented
that the permanent
renewal
included
an annual
assessment.  
Council Member Veenker loved the vitality piece of parklets. The City getting involved in
business consent made her nervous as there were a lot of challenges in letting parklets go past
their own storefront. It made sense that almost every other city limited parklets to the store’s
frontage to avoid challenges and provide predictability. She thought that ultimately efforts
should be directed to the larger downtown plan, and she was disappointed it would take five to
seven years. She rested on her previous comments related to fees. She thanked Director Lait for
the cleaning fee.  
Mayor Kou concurred with Council Member Veenker on parklet size and parking. If parklets
were to be allowed to go beyond their own space, she thought the charge should be levied
now. She queried how the liability would be handled if there was an accident on a parklet and if
the City could be a party. She was concerned there could be more liability with propane. She
preferred a uniform parklet size, as recommended by staff. She suggested there be a lease
involved with or without uniformity. Regarding the consent letter, she did not believe staff
should be mediating tenants or landlords. It would be cleaner if a consent letter required the
property owner, tenant, and neighbor to discuss. She did not think parklets should be
permanent, that they were intended to be temporary, and with businesses possibly returning, it
was unclear how much public space would be needed. She remarked that this issue should be
looked at as a whole and should include the downtown design plan. She agreed with Number 2
on Slide 6 and asked if it had more to do with University Avenue than California Avenue.  
City Attorney Molly Stump indicated that the liability would depend on the facts and claims of
individuals. It was possible that the City could be a party.  
City Manager Shikada mentioned that the criteria and standards recommended by staff were
intended to manage the liability risk. 
Assistant Director Boyd declared that the parklet area included the California Avenue area but
not the closed portion.  
Council Member Lauing noted that the geography was not on the slide. He opined that normal
terms should be in the lease agreement – termination clauses, etc. He thought the dates the
consent letters needing to be in should be adjusted because people did not have time to
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
respond and that Council should nullify those dates and determine the dates at a later time, 
and if existing parklets needed to be modified, they needed time.  
Assistant Director Boyd declared there were three outstanding letters of consent and that the
date had been extended to April 14. They could accept recommendations from Council
regarding time or staff could look at it.  
City Manager Shikada noted the administrative
burden was a consideration in the staff
recommendation. Staff had spent considerable time on parklets. Going forward, a program
requiring customized solutions on a parklet-by-parklet basis would be burdensome to staff and
included the parking space criteria. He addressed safety issues, etc., considered in staff’s
recommendation. Parklets fell under Streets, and there could be many things requiring a
parklet be removed or modified in a moment’ s notice.  
Council Member Burt did not think of parklets being on more than one side of a building as
customized, and asked why that was considered an additional burden.  
City Manager Shikada specified there were many issues.  
Discussion ensued regarding issues related to a parklet being on more than one side of a
building.  
Council Member Burt did not find the arguments presented to be valid. He explained why the
discussion should be on an objective basis of important issues as opposed to decisions being
justified. He proposed staff return with standards that would encourage the use of electric
heating and provide adequate safety during a transition from propane to predominantly
electric, and if a business should retain propane long term, they must abide by full safety
standards. He proposed staff return with proposals on greater vehicular safety, perspectively K-
rail protection on the leading corners of parklets. Regarding permission for parklets on adjacent
properties, he suggested structures not be allowed beyond the edge of the establishment but
that non-structures ( tables and chairs) be allowed, and if a new tenant wanted the space, they
would be able to obtain rights to that space. He did not know if Council was ready to make
specific recommendations tonight regarding fees. He requested coming back to Council with
fee recommendations on the low end of the staff range and that staff to come back with some
form of a process for non-food and beverage parklets. He suggested parklet size be limited to
350 square feet but that a parklet could be increased to two if they had street frontage and a
covered parklet could only occur in front of the tenant. He requested staff establish a protocol
for warnings and fines related to cleaning.  
Discussion ensued regarding the motion related to the letter of consent, parklets with
structures, and uncovered parklet size (with a placeholder of 350 square feet).  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
Council Member Burt asked the square footage of the largest parklet; how much parklets
protruded beyond one’s frontage; if there were parklets that were more than 350 square feet; 
and if there were parklets occupying a neighbor’ s space without a letter of consent. 
Assistant Director Boyd declared the biggest parklet was in front of Taverna, and she had not
heard anyone ask for more space.  
Assistant to the City Manager Steve Guagliardo addressed there being a letter of consent
requirement in place regarding size and those going beyond that. Nine businesses had gotten
the letter of consent. Going 350 feet beyond a store’s frontage in an uncovered structure would
be another two parking spaces. They had not seen applications like that come in. There were no
parklets more than 350 square feet, which was how they structured the current proposal. There
were three businesses that had not been able to obtain the letter of consent but were
occupying the space.  
Council Member Veenker liked the transition to electric with the propane bridge. She was
contemplating pulling Item 3. She agreed with the low end of fees.  
Council Member Tanaka asked if this would be permanent for the next five to seven years. He
asked if the maker and seconder would consider adding a design element.  
City Attorney Stump clarified it might be five to seven years before the big redesign, but Council
could amend the parklet ordinance at any time.  
Council Member Burt acknowledged that design was a valid concern and asked if staff had
looked at any design standards in general and if there would be consistency in the aesthetics. 
He was willing to accept the direction staff and the ARB had taken.  
Director Lait confirmed there were design components.  
Planning Partners, Inc., Associate Planner Hannah Chan Smyth noted that the permanent
parklet standards included design considerations. The had had a number of meetings with the
Architectural Review Board who had reviewed the standards and provided feedback that had
been incorporated. She welcomed additional feedback. She was not sure if the standards were
designed at this stage to prescribe specific design. There was room for creativity for businesses. 
The design standards were focused mostly on high quality, use of colors, distances for periodic
barriers and railings, and avoiding particular materials.  
Assistant to the City Manager Steve Guagliardo declared the design standards were on Packet
Page 101 from the March 13 meeting.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to make sure the motion covered compliance with building
codes, fire, etc. He asked for a friendly amendment ensuring safety codes would be met, and if
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 21 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
the maker and seconder would be supportive of revisiting a potential parking structure
downtown to make up for lost parking.  
City Attorney Stump declared there was risk inherent in this activity. It could not be assured
that the City could be held responsible in the event of a problem. 
Director Lait stated ADA was incorporated into the design standards. The fire-code areas of
interest were embedded into the standards. An underlying compliance requirement with fire
codes could be added. Electrical permits were evaluated to the electrical code. The City would
not be involved with plumbing. Staff had presented a perspective that the building code would
not apply.  
Council Member Burt thought parking was beyond the scope of this action, but guidance had
been given to staff to evaluate downtown parking, and there should be discussions on the
subject. The longer term downtown plan would be a more appropriate time to address parking.  
Council Member Tanaka asked if the maker and seconder would be open to adding that
parklets be in compliance with building codes. 
Council Member Burt expressed that some aspects of the building code had been incorporated. 
He was inclined to stay the current course. He spoke of larger single structures and two small
separated structures being two different issues.  
City Manager Shikada remarked that meeting industry standards would mean applying the
building code. They had provided a number of tactics to address a number of the issues. Not
applying the building code represented a level of safety risk.  
Director Lait clarified that 350 square feet was a fire code requirement. The extent the building
code applied to parklets was unclear. He explained why they recommended keeping parking to
two spaces. He noted that applying the building code would dictate occupancy, restroom, etc., 
requirements. The building code would look at the totality of the space and not whether it was
separated by a walkway for restroom purposes, etc. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if anyone would support adding an unfriendly amendment
stating parklets should comply to building codes. He suggested getting feedback from the
property and business owners and the community regarding design.  
Council Member Veenker asked if a building code would apply to a nonstructure and if size was
one of many factors in the totality of the circumstances as to the size of the risk. She declined
to second Council Member Tanaka’ s unfriendly amendment. 
Director Lait acknowledged that the building code would apply to the totality of a parklet, 
structure or not. He expressed why they wanted to keep parklets de minimis size.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 22 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
City Attorney Stump confirmed that size was one of many factors in the totality of the
circumstances as to the size of the risk.  
Mayor Kou asked if the Redwood City’s parklet fees were hindering parklets and if the lease
fees would be appropriated to events, decorations, etc. She preferred the mid-level feels. 
Director Lait had not done analysis to understand how fees may have deterred parklets in
another jurisdiction. They collected only fee information for comparison.  
City Manager Shikada noted that the fee appropriation would be limited to the parklet
program.  
Discussion ensued regarding changing the language of the motion related to the letter of
consent and an adjacent tenant and landlord.  
Fire Marshal Tami Jasso wanted to clarify if Item 1 indicated the fire code would not have to be
followed for a period of time or if there was to be compliance with the fire code as far as
storage and use of propane. She asked if Council was asking them to look at fire code
requirements.  
Council Member Burt stated the concept of Item 1 was to have staff come back with interim
requirements. He did not know if there was a way to move from where the City had been to
where the City wanted to be regarding propane. He asked if seven months would be enough
time for parklets to meet propane fire code or move to electric.  
Director Lait remarked the fire code had to be enforced and enforcement had been lax. They
were concerned about parklets conforming to regulations. Compliance with the fire code might
be the incentive in place to move to electric without having to do anything new.  
Discussion ensued regarding transitioning from propane to electric, parklet size and standards, 
building codes, building structures, enforcement, letter of consent, covered versus uncovered
parklets, existing parklets and new regulations, safety from vehicles, right of refusal, consent
time lengths, and funding for consultant support, which were incorporated in the motion. 
Director Lait expressed it was going to take months for staff to revise the standards and bring
this back to Council and, as a result, the temporary parklets standards needed to be extended, 
and they would submit that to Council on consent.  
Council Member Veenker expressed why she wanted to separate Item 3 from the motion. She
struggled with supporting it because it seemed to increase and decrease the value of certain
spaces.  
Council Member Tanaka asked that Item 5 be split because he was concerned about the
building code implication.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 23 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
Mayor Kou asked to separate Item 8. She was not able to support Items 1 through 7. She
agreed with Council Member Veenker and thought staff needed clearer direction to avoid more
difficulties.  
City Clerk Lesley Milton requested clarification on the vote order. 
City Attorney Stump indicated that the order City Clerk Milton had was fine.  
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lauing to:  
3.  Parklets with structures are not allowed to extend beyond the establishment leasing the
parklet, non-structures are allowed without a letter of consent. If a tenant wishes to permit
the space, after 90 days they are able to obtain the rights to that space
MOTION PASSED: 4-3, Tanaka, Kou, Veenker No
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lauing to:  
5. The size of the covered parklets be limited to 350 square feet in total, but can have up to
two provided they are limited in location to the tenant’ s street frontage
MOTION PASSED: 5-2, Kou, Tanaka No
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lauing to:  
8. Amend the Fiscal year 2023 Budget Appropriation for the General Fund
a. Increasing the public works expenditure for contract services by $85K
b. Decrease the Budget Stabilization Reserve by $85
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lauing to:  
1. Direct staff to return with incentives that will encourage the use of electric heating
2. Direct staff to return with proposals on greater safety from vehicles including k rail, 
concrete barrier or equivalent standard on leading edge corners
4.  Direct staff to come back with fee recommendations on the “low end” of fees
6.  That there be a system for the responsibility for cleaning by the establishment, and staff
devise a notification system for meeting standards
7.  Existing parklets in front of adjacent buildings can retain their structures until these new
regulations apply
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Kou No
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 24 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
10. 
Approval of and Direction on a Residential Natural Gas Rebate Program Funded by the
City’s General Fund at a Total Cost of up to $1,771,586 to Mitigate Extraordinarily High
January 2023 Natural Gas Costs, Approval of a Budget Amendment in the General Fund, 
and an Update on Green v. City of Palo Alto
Director of Utilities Dean Batchelor voiced that they were seeking approval and direction on the
Residential Natural Gas Rebate Program.  
Utilities Strategic Business Manager Dave Yuan specified they were bringing forth to Council a
couple residential natural gas rebate options. He shared slides referencing Options A and B. He
addressed the gas commodity price spike and the impacts of it. He presented a table showing
rebate amounts under each option. They received feedback from the Finance Committee
concerning the electric rebate discussion on March 21, and they felt neither program proposed
achieved the goal of a meaningful rebate to all residential customers. They asked that
additional assistance be provided to low income and residents with hardships and requested
the amount of the cost and how customers would be identified. He supplied a slide outlining
different program options. He discussed the customer assistance programs that were in place. 
He commented that in addition to the programs, Mayor Kou had sent letters to the Governor’ s
office, Federal Congress, and State legislators to investigate the extremely high gas bills by FERC
and CPUC to identify the cause and identify mitigation strategies to prevent a future event. 
However, Federal
and State
investigations
could
take
years to complete. They were
coordinating with NCPA and CMUA to try to figure out what happened during the month of
January.  
City Attorney Molly Stump added that the Staff Report included an update on the Green v. City
of Palo Alto case, and sufficient funds had been set aside for rebates to customers. Since the
writing of the Staff Report, the Court of Appeal had endorsed the party’s proposal. There were
still a number of steps. They would go back to the trial court, and the trial court would need to
hold a hearing and approve it, and then the City would be in position to begin paying the
rebates.  
Public Comment
John Kelley pointed out that the Staff Report did not indicate the incomes of those having high
bills. He felt it was misleading to correlate a high gas bill with high income. He agreed with the
recommendation of the Finance Committee that the relief focus on people most in need. He did
not think either alternative presented by staff addressed that need. He encouraged the Council
to means test the relief as much as possible and requested at least 50% of the money
appropriated be directed to those at or below 120% of AMI and suggested ways to make that
determination. 
Council Member Burt mentioned that the Finance Committee had struggled to have a
meaningful rebate and one that would support members of the community most in need. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 25 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
There was no perfect solution, and the Finance Committee had identified the options presented
by staff.   
Council Member Lythcott-Haims noted that the Finance Committee had asked staff to come to
Council with a recommendation on gas, and staff went to the Finance Committee with a
recommendation on electric. There were options presented in the electric context that they
thought might be suitable for gas, which were not reflected in the presented options. She
explained why a mechanism for identifying who had the greatest financial need was not
reflected in the Staff Report, and she provided an example how those in need could be
identified, but she worried about staff time. She had concerns of punishing those who were
conserving gas. She was inclined to support the option mentioning the people who were
already getting 25% reduction, those in arears, and Project PLEDGE. She opined that whatever
rule was arrived at, it should be consistent for gas and electric.  
Manager Yuan specified that they had the data for customers on rate assistance and those in
arears. The Project PLEDGE [ inaudible] application was taxing for staff. He would like to
combine gas and electric to save staff work. 
City Manager Ed Shikada questioned whether Council wanted to consider the gas rebate and
the electric rebate together or continue handling them on parallel paths.  
Council Member Veenker listed pros and cons of each option. She explained a possible hybrid
model, which would reward lower users but give everybody something significant. She would
love to see a hybrid that would help lower income residents. She explained that the cost of her
proposal would be almost $2M.  
Manager Yuan stated the options were results of the Finance Committee’ s feedback, and there
was a request to make it more meaningful to everyone.  
Council Member Tanaka thought this should be kept simple and staff cost kept low. He detailed
why he supported Option B for the gas rebate. He felt the electric rebate should be a flat 20%. 
He proposed a motion to approve a natural gas rebate program to mitigate high January 2023
natural gas bills and a flat rate of $88.78 on the average January gas bill of $403.90. He did not
have a strong preference related to amending the Fiscal Year 2023 Budget Appropriation.  
Vice Mayor Stone declared the motion failed for lack of a second. 
Council Member Lauing asked if there was an obligation to former residents, if the $243K could
be divided amongst remaining residents, and if Finance had considered going higher than 20%.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 26 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
Manager Yuan confirmed there could be reallocation of the funds. He noted that the report
indicated 600 customers had moved, but it was actually 100 customers, so it should be $50K
versus $243K.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims stated Finance did not consider going higher than 20%, 
although they had considered the possibility of going higher for those in need, and she
referenced the “ Finance Committee Feedback – Alternative Gas Rebate” slide that she felt
addressed it. She thought some would get double assistance and that there would be an
additional $ 200K saved related to those who were no longer residents and that that could be
diverted toward those with the greatest financial need.  
Manager Yuan clarified that a resident could not be in more than one program and that they
would get one rebate or the other, not both.  
Council Member Lauing voiced that going up to 25% would add $442K, which he explained was
net of about $200K. He accepted the 20% and liked the hybrid approaches, and voiced both
were appealing.  
Kiely Nose explained that every dollar allocated as part of this process would be a dollar not
allocated for the 2024 budget. The electric and gas programs were proposed at $2.5M, and
with the considered changes, it could be a $3.5M program. She detailed why the $200K Council
Member Lauing was using in his calculation should be a smaller number.  
Manager Yuan indicated it would be $ 50K, not $200K. There were about 20 customers that
would overlap between the rate assistance and the arrears, and Council could ask that there be
participation in both programs, which the total cost would be $ 2.3M based on the current
proposal.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims supported those in need being able to participate in both
programs.  
Mayor Kou questioned how the 20% rebate would be disbursed and if some funding had been
taken from the rate stabilization account and if that indicated falling below the Council’ s target
for the Stabilization Reserve. She would be cautious going above the proposed $1,771,586. She
felt the rebate should focus on the January gas rate spike. 
Manager Yuan clarified the rebates would be reflected as credits on bills.  
Kiely Nose stated $85K was used from the Budget Stabilization Reserve in the General Fund as
part of the parklets item. The Council’ s target for the Stabilization Reserve was 18.5, and there
was about $6M above that, and she specified what the funds were allocated for, which were
also the funds Council would be allocating as part of the 2024 proposed budget process.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 27 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
Council Member Burt voiced that there was merit in the round numbers in the proposal, and he
was inclined to go that way. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims moved for adoption of the Alternative Gas Rebate presented
by staff. 
Manager Yuan proposed that Council give staff a dollar threshold to work within and staff could
change some figures to ensure they would fit within the total amount.  
Council Member Tanaka seconded it.  
Manager Yuan inquired if the minimum flat amount could drop to 75 instead of 80. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims noted, in her view, the flat amount could drop to 75.  
Discussion ensued regarding funding, a tiered structure, flat amounts and bill range, and
additional contributions for those in the Rate Assistance Program and customers in arrears, not
to exceed 20% of the entire January receipts, which was in the Staff Report Council received
about 3:45 that afternoon. 
100 rebate for greater than $800
85 for $400-$800
70 for less than $400
Residents can apply for an additional $50
Council Member Tanaka suggested there be an application process for the rebate and that it
not be applied automatically.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims thought that would be too burdensome for staff.  
Mayor Kou appreciated and supported it being 20% for rebates. 
MOTION: Council Member Lythcott-Haims moved, seconded by Council Member Tanaka to:  
A. Approve a residential natural gas rebate program to mitigate extraordinary high January
2023 natural gas bills in a tired structure proposed by staff known as alternative gas
rebate with additional contributions for members in the rate assistance program and
customers in arrears not to exceed 20% of the total January gas bill
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 28 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
B. Amend the Fiscal Year 2023 Budget Appropriation
a. In the General Fund by: 
i. Increasing the Transfer to the Gas Fund by $1,796,330
ii. Decreasing the Budget Stabilization Reserve by $1,796,330
b. In the Gas Fund by: 
i. Increasing the Transfer from the General Fund by $1,796,330
ii. Decreasing Residential Gas Retail Revenue by $1,796,330
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
Director Yuan asked regarding the disbursement of funds if staff could come back on April 17 to
combine gas and electric or if there should be two credits in separate months. 
The Council affirmed that staff could come back on April 17 with gas and electric rates
combined.  
Mayor Kou believed a clear message needed to go out regarding the gas rebate. 
Council Member Tanaka did not want a lengthy process.  
Council Member Burt wanted this done sooner rather than later.  
Discussion ensued related to staff time in bringing back to Council electric and gas separately, 
and it was decided that Director Batchelor would bring the electric alternative concept back to
Council on consent if acceptable, working within a 20% budget, the electric being a little less
than $750K, and using the words “ Winter Rebate.” 
Council Member Questions, Comments, Announcements
Council Member Tanaka thanked staff and his colleagues for their attendance and work on
Town Hall yesterday and suggested Council members rotate being on Town Hall. 
Adjournment
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 29 of 29
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/27/2023
The meeting was adjourned at 12:01 a.m. 
