CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 29 
Special Meeting 
 
January 30, 2023 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual 
teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker 
Present Remotely:  
 
None 
Absent: 
 
None 
 
Mayor Kou called the meeting to order at 5:00 P.M.  
City Clerk Lesley Milton called the roll and declared all were present.  
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
There were none. 
Public Comment 
 
Fred Balin (Speaking on behalf of Enid Parson, Emily Renzel, Greg Schmid, Angelica Volterra, 
Dorothy Bender, Mary Sylvester, Rebecca Sanders, Jeff Levinsky, Doria Summa, Ann Balin, 
Annette Ross) noted that Attorney Thomas Jordan had passed away earlier in January 2023 and 
would be interred in Alta Mesa Memorial Park at a later date. He spoke of his life and his 
support of open spaces. A series of DVDs of oral histories had been submitted to the Media 
Center, which would be played on February 4, 5, and 7 on Channel 30.  
Karen Holman spoke of Attorney Thomas Jordan personally.  
Aram James thanked the previous speakers for their comments regarding Attorney Thomas 
Jordan. He read a statement he had written to the Council in opposition of tasers and the K-9 
Unit. He spoke briefly of the First Amendment and the implications of limiting speech. 
Talya Schube, a representative of the Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition, commented on 
climate change. She asked that the commitment to the 80 x 30 goal be reaffirmed. They 
supported the City’s efforts to achieve climate justice.  
Consent Calendar 
1. 
Approval of Minutes from December 12, 2022, December 19, 2022 and January 9, 2023 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
 
2. 
Approval of Amendment Number One (1) with Insight Public Sector, C20177991 
Extending the Term by Three Years and Compensation by $1,686,615 Utilizing a 
Riverside County Agreement for Citywide Microsoft Licensing and Approve a 
Contingency in the Amount of $100,000 Annually, for a new Total Not-to-Exceed 
Contract Amount to $3,628,317; CEQA Status—not a project 
 
3. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of Amendments to Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter 
18.09, Accessory and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units due to State Law Changes and 
Direction from the California Department of Housing and Community Development. 
Environmental Assessment: Exempt from the provisions of the California Environmental 
Quality Act (CEQA) pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 21080.17 and CEQA 
Guidelines sections 15061(b)(3), 15301, 15302 and 15305. Planning and Transportation 
Commission Recommended Approval of the Ordinance. 
Public Comment 
John Kelly addressed the proposed ordinance adopted by the City Council on December 12, 
2022, regarding two-story ADUs. He respectfully asked that the second ordinance be taken off 
the Consent Calendar and that it be deliberated on further. He requested making two-story 
ADUs the norm regardless of the size of the ADU and had sent a letter outlining why he thought 
it was a sensible policy.  
Maureen Bard requested approval of the updated ADU municipal code be withheld and asked 
the restrictive height limit on ADUs be reconsidered.  
Aram James agreed with the previous speakers and requested Item 3 be taken off the agenda 
and that there be more conversation. He outlined why there could be litigation concerning the 
issue. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 2. 
Council Members Lythcott-Haims, Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 3. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Stone moved, seconded by Mayor Kou to approve Consent Agenda Item 
Numbers 1-3. 
MOTION PASSED FOR  Item 1: 7-0 
MOTION PASSED FOR  Item 2: 6-1, Tanaka No 
MOTION PASSED FOR  Item 3: 5-2, Lythcott-Haims, Tanaka No 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims indicated regarding Item 3 that she did not want the ADU 
ordinance to be brought in compliance with the State’s law but rather to go further and allow 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
taller ADUs across Palo Alto, which would achieve equity across the city. Because of the tree 
ordinance, extending a two-story ADU citywide would make it more likely ADUs would be built.  
Council Member Tanaka indicated he had the same thoughts on Item 3 as Council Member 
Lythcott-Haims and felt the housing stock needed to be increased to solve the housing 
problem, and as there was a second story review, there was not a lot of danger of being more 
flexible on second stories. In regard to Item 2, he thought the City should get a better contract. 
He also did not like that there was a $300K blank-check contingency. He indicated it was also 
$100K a year over budget.  
City Manager Comments 
 
 
City Manager Ed Shikada expressed it would be appropriate to do a follow-up communication 
to Council in regard to Item 2. He indicated the action and ordinance of Item 3 was intended to 
maintain compliance with State law and was time sensitive. Staff was working on the next 
iteration of ADU regulations and would bring it to PTC and City Council later in the spring. 
Further discussion of two-story ADUs would be appropriate for next week. He reflected on the 
First Amendment and the Police Department. He discussed mental health and recent tragedies, 
and the City homepage provided links for available resources. He referred to high utility bills 
and mentioned available resources. He discussed available cold-weather advisory resources. He 
presented a slide of planned programs for Black History Month. There would be additional days 
and/or hours of operation for all library branches, the details of which were on the website. 
There was ongoing recruitment through February for board and commission positions. He listed 
the 2023 Council Priorities City Council approved. Upcoming agendas would include continued 
discussion of the Council Priorities, a study session on the shuttle service, and discussion and 
action on gas powered leaf blower enforcement on February 6; study sessions related 
economic development and the Buena Vista Mobile Home Park, a mid-year budget review, and 
Council Committee work plans on February 13; and a parklets update, Palo Alto Airport Status 
Study Session, procurement for automated license plate readers, and a proposed ordinance for 
firearms in sensitive places was scheduled for February 27 and beyond. The February 20, 2023, 
Council meeting would be cancelled in observance of Presidents’ Day. 
Action Items 
AA1. 
City Council discussion and direction regarding wage requirements for the contract for 
next Janitorial services (Continued from the 1/23/23 Meeting) 
A.  
Review and Provide Direction on Wage and Benefits Requirements for Inclusion 
in a New Janitorial Services Request for Proposal (RFP) 
B.  
Responsible Contracting Standards Colleague's Memo (Stone & Burt) 
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston requested guidance on the wages and benefits 
requirements to be included in the upcoming RFP leading to a new janitorial contract.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Assistant Director Public Works Mike Wong stated the Staff Report sought Council direction on 
the wage and benefits requirements for the new janitorial services bid solicitation. The current 
contract was to end in seven months. He indicated what the original bid solicitation focused on 
and what the new RFP would continue to focus on. He outlined three benefit requirement 
options staff was proposing. He furnished two tables staff had prepared related to the cost 
differences for the wages and benefits for each of the options.   
Director Brad Eggleston mentioned a supplemental memo had been published with the agenda 
on January 26, 2023, that answered questions related to payment of back wages under the 
current contract. 
City Manager Ed Shikada noted that resources would likely need to be considered to ensure 
contractor wage and benefit compliance. Collective bargaining agreement (CBA) requirements 
may require the City Attorney’s office and staff follow up moving forward.  
Vice Mayor Stone addressed wage theft and substandard working conditions with the third-
party contractor. They received many requests to adopt a higher level of standards for 
subcontracted 
services. 
Assemblymember 
Berman 
encouraged 
adoption 
of 
the 
recommendation in the Memo, and Senator Becker supported the proposal. He referenced the 
needs the Memo addressed. He supported adopting a higher prevailing wage. He referred to a 
report by the Maintenance Cooperation Trust Fund. He noted why having a CBA was of 
particular importance to janitorial services and specified the recommendation was about the 
health, safety, and dignity of the city’s janitors and ensured they were properly represented 
and cared for particularly in an industry with a well-documented history and ongoing practice of 
violating labor and employment laws.  
Council Member Burt expressed that people performing work on behalf of the City needed a 
fair living wage. He asked the date of the final version of Colleagues’ Memo. He proposed 
looking at outsourcing policies at the upcoming discussion on priorities for the year and to 
include discussion about how Colleagues’ Memos would be prioritized and agendized.  
Director Eggleston answered the Colleagues’ Memo was originally agendized for the November 
14, 2022, meeting.  
Vice Mayor Stone declared it was submitted October 5, 2022. 
City Manager Shikada remarked they received it in October.  
Public Comment #AA1 – Janitorial Services  
Aram James supported the CBA and hoped there would not be a third-party contractor. He 
opined comparable wages and health benefits were needed for janitorial services. He 
requested having conversations with Vice Mayor Stone and Council Member Burt.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Cassie Peabody read in Spanish comments from a group of SWA janitors, which she then 
translated into English, which stated a responsible contractor policy valuing their rights was 
needed.  
Jose Pavon, a political organizer with SEIU-USWW, requested he translate for a speaker that 
needed translation. He believed the Memo indicated $17.50/hour was the contracted wage, 
which was not a livable wage. He asked the City of Palo Alto to act in support of the workers.  
[Carmen Salivas] (translated by Jose Pavon) had been a member of SEIU-USWW for 23 years 
and supported being union with a stable salary, paid holidays, stable benefits, paid vacation, 
and automatic raises. She wanted the workers of Palo Alto to also enjoy the same benefits.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims expressed it was incumbent upon local government to seek to 
better understand and better serve the most vulnerable workers and residents providing 
services deemed essential and to ensure it be a top priority that janitorial workers be 
compensated appropriately and free from harassment and wage theft from their employer.  
Council Member Veenker echoed Council Member Lythcott-Haims’ comments about being 
judged by how we treat the most vulnerable. She was glad to see the prevailing wage and the 
CBAs raised in the Memo. She inquired how the prevailing wage in Table 1 would be addressed 
going forward with the City-determined wage starting at $20 or higher for the PUC + union 
wage.  
Director Eggleston answered that they could require the PUC prevailing wage, union wage, or a 
CBA not have different higher wages for the different classifications. They suggested looking at 
the scale of wages staff had defined and applying that and set a floor for the wages that could 
apply even if collective bargaining and/or the PUC wage was required.  
Council Member Veenker asked if that meant starting with the PUC prevailing wage plus the 
union wage but keeping the relative increases as they were under the City-determined wages 
going up the scale.  
Director Eggleston confirmed that was correct.  
Council Member Lauing considered this a morality issue and commented the Council needed to 
be fully committed. He presumed the 40% increase was a General Fund item that needed to be 
budgeted, which he was fine with.  
Director Eggleston answered a great majority of it was a General Fund cost, but it was not that 
simple because the services were provided to areas occupied by Enterprise funds.  
Council Member Burt questioned if the Council should support Option 3, which aligned with the 
Colleagues’ Memo, and what they foresaw as the process by which the bidders would be able 
to have a CBA before commencement of the new contract and if the bidders they had used had 
had CBAs. He queried if from a timing standpoint there would a hurdle from the remainder of 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
time on the existing contact to the new bidders going through a collective bargaining before 
implementation of the contract because, the way it was written, a contract with a bidder could 
be settled on without them having a CBA, but it would need to be in place by the time the 
contract took effect. He asked if a bidder did not have CBAs would they have to go into that to 
be able to bid or take the risk of an unknown cost if they negotiated it subsequent to receiving 
the contract but prior to the effective date. He pointed out key benefits in Option 1. He was 
concerned that 24 months was a long while to wait for qualification for healthcare. Regarding 
the different categories within the work sector, he requested an explanation of the different 
qualifications of a police department custodian and a utilities custodian versus a general 
purpose custodian.   
Assistant Director Wong answered that most of the bidders in past RFPs had not been 
Collective Bargaining Units (CBUs). He thought a few companies without CBAs would bid, and 
he indicated what that could mean. Regarding the different categories within the work sector, 
different job classifications were based on different skillsets and qualifications.  
Director Eggleston added they could not say exactly what bidders would do. Some companies 
had CBAs. There was an SEIU master agreement for the region that private companies could 
sign up to, which he understood they could go into the collective bargaining whether they 
became SEIU or some other union and could use that as a master agreement. From a timing 
standpoint, there would a hurdle, but that language had not been drafted. He thought it was 
correct if a bidder did not have CBAs they would have to go into that to be able to bid or take 
the risk of an unknown cost if they negotiated it subsequent to receiving the contract but prior 
to the effective date.  
City Manager Shikada expected the only companies that would bid on this would be those with 
a CBA.  
Council Member Tanaka asked why the contract was renewed with the current janitorial service 
if they were violating labor standards; why the City, not the janitorial service, had to pay for the 
difference in wages; besides Mountain View what other cities had adopted practices of this 
proposal; if the cost would be 44% more than the current cost and where it would come from; 
and why some services were provided by City employees and some contractors and why not 
contract out everything, not just janitorial.  
Director Eggleston explained the current janitorial service contract was renewed because in 
previous reports it had been characterized as more of a misunderstanding than a violation, and 
when the issue was presented to them, they immediately corrected it. Services needed to be 
continued, and doing an RFP and developing a new contract would have taken time. They tried 
to bring the item to Council in October or early November, but it was continued, and they did 
not have a choice other than to further extend the contract. Also, this RFP would be a different 
process. Staff recommended the City pay for the difference in wages to make sure it happened 
expeditiously and fairly. They were not aware of other cities adopting such a proposal. They 
could not say exactly how much it would cost, and he explained it would be on the order of a 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
$1M annual increase, and it was part of Council’s decision how to budget the funds. He 
explained why some services were contracted and some provided by City employees.  
City Attorney Molly Stump stated questions regarding services being provided by City 
employees versus contractors was beyond the boundaries of the agenda item. A deeper dive 
needed to be done for a noticed item so staff could be prepared. The area was very 
complicated, and the janitorial contract was one of many types of contracts, and there were 
many reasons for contracting services and complicated legal issues regarding the type of 
services and the process.  
Mayor Kou believed it was important to visit and revisit the living wage. She inquired how 
vendor compliance would be ensured, and thought it was an area that needed to be further 
explored and solidified. She questioned where the money would come from.  
Director Eggleston indicated ensuring vendor compliance was usually more focused on ensuring 
they were fulfilling the scope of services they were being paid for and not on the wages and 
benefits side. At least in Public Works, he believed the janitorial contract was the first time 
wage and benefit requirements had been established versus following a process of determining 
performance stands and choosing the lowest bidder. The City did not have much experience 
monitoring wage and benefits compliance.  
City Manager Shikada noted if additional wage and benefits requirements were to be part of 
the RFP they want to ensure adequate resourcing to ensure compliance.  
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved to look at this proposal and all contracts for services 
during the budget review cycle.  
Council Member Tanaka commented that Council was thinking about moving forward with this 
but the question of where funds would come from had not been answered.  
Motion died for lack of a second. 
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Stone adopt Option 3 as 
stated in the staff report and to scale the new wage set in proportion to classifications included 
in Option 1 using the PUC base custodian prevailing wage as a baseline.  
Council Member Burt hoped his colleagues would support the proposal.  
Vice Mayor Stone expressed there was an economic benefit to passing the motion. He quoted 
Senator Becker’s letter in that he strongly supported the proposal and hoped the Council did as 
well. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims acknowledged Council Member Tanaka’s motion. She was not 
going to vote for it, but she was not sure if she should have seconded it in order to have the 
conversation. It was important that Council be good fiscal stewards of the City’s resources and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
that there be consistency across all third-party contracts providing services. She intended to 
examine those issues as they came before Council, perhaps around budget time in the spring. 
She supported the present motion.  
Council Member Veenker supported the motion. She thought it was a good vehicle to explore 
how to deal with the CBA requirement. The prevailing wage requirement was a little different 
and a little bit of a departure, so Council would see how they did with the broader budget 
discussions.  
City Manager Shikada wanted to confirm his understanding of the motion and queried if it was 
correct that the PUC wage would be used as the minimum to scale the other wages to reflect 
the classifications.  
Director Eggleston acknowledged that was correct.  
Discussion ensued regarding the language of the motion, and changes were made for clarity. 
Mayor Kou asked if $20 was used as the base and the percentage of the lead custodian, etc., 
going up.   
Asst Director Wong clarified that it would be based on the dollar amount job classification 
because the rates may change in the next contract.  
Council Member Burt stated the lead custodian, etc., would increase at the same percentage 
they currently did.  
Council Member Tanaka asked why the wording of the motion was changed. He would support 
the wording of the original motion, not the current motion.  
Council Member Burt stated it was based on the information in Table 1, which he explained. 
Mayor Kou asked if healthcare benefits would go into effect after two years of service and if 
there would be monitoring to ensure people would not be dismissed from service close to the 
two-year mark.  
Director Eggleston understood healthcare benefits would start after two years of service.  
Council Member Burt stated they would be contractually bound to meet all of the contract 
requirements, including healthcare benefits.  
City Manager Shikada stated healthcare benefits would be defined in the CBA.  
Vice Mayor Stone asked if the CBA could negotiate a shorter time frame for healthcare benefits. 
Director Eggleston indicated that could be done.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Council Member Tanaka questioned if the vote could be split as he liked the motion as it was 
originally versus the modified version.  
City Attorney Stump declared that motion was not on the floor and he could make a substitute 
motion.   
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka No 
4. 
Review and Adoption of the Policy and Services Committee Recommendations on the 
Revised Council Procedures and Protocols Handbook (previously discussed on 
December 19, 2022)  
Deputy City Manager Chantal Cotton-Gains gave a brief overview of the Council Procedures and 
Protocols Handbook. She indicated the purpose of the handbook. It required City Council 
adoption, and there would be annual review through the Policy & Services Committee. She 
discussed what brought the Council to this review. The process of changing policy pieces in the 
handbook would be done annually through the P&S Committee, which was currently 
happening. The item was being brought back to City Council so the different topics could be 
expanded on. To organize the meeting, they were hoping to have discussion section by section, 
and that it could be done with tentative approvals or agreements for each section with the goal 
of adopting as much as possible.  
Mayor Kou noted the goal was to approve handbook sections so work could be done within a 
framework. There may need to be further refinements or amendments by staff.  
Council Member Lauing asked if procedurally the order on Packet Page 42 and 43 would be 
followed of Items 1 through 16 and if they could work with the redlined version. He inquired if 
the asterisks would be addressed last.  
Mayor Kou confirmed the redlined version could be followed. As the sections are gone through, 
the asterisks not addressed would be addressed at the end.  
City Manager Ed Shikada commented it was effectively a page turn on the document. Pages 42 
and 43 were policy issues that had been identified through the P&S discussion and was a subset 
of the page by page. Those issues would be raised as Council proceeded section by section to 
make sure they were part of the discussion.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains requested sections being discussed be identified for the 
public and staff to follow along.  
Vice Mayor Stone stated the asterisks were a few critical policy changes that did not reach 
consensus at P&S, which Council needed to discuss further.  
Public Comment 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Fred Balin commented that reporting on quasi-judicial hearings required more than stating it 
had been covered in the Staff Report, and according to the policies and procedures, disclosure 
was supposed to include anything that impacted the Council’s decision. He addressed the 
extended release of the packet window being 10 days, project plans being submitted to the City 
Manager or the Planning Department 5 days before a meeting, and the policy for City Council 
speaking to Planning Commissioners regarding a project going through the process.  
Aram James thought Point B under Public Decorum and Meetings regarding remarks being 
addressed to Council as a body and not to any individual member or staff person needed to be 
amended consistent with the United States Constitution. Regarding professionalism and 
equitable rights, he asked that earlier comments that he believed were directed at him be 
stricken from the record. He wanted taser and the K-9 issues on the agenda.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains mentioned that the travel section had been updated for the 
draft.  
Mayor Kou specified the discussion would start with Packet Page 96 (Item Page 56), Table of 
Contents.  
There were no comments. 
Mayor Kou proceeded to Packet Page 97, City Council Procedures, Section 1.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims outlined her reasoning for supporting rotation in the 
assignment of mayor.  
Council Member Veenker asked if Referrals referenced on Packet Page 97 meant if something 
was referred to a standing committee that the Council could not address the issue at that 
meeting and there would have to be public notice and it be addressed at a later date. She 
enquired what “submit” meant in regard to Council members submitting matters to the 
Council. She questioned if two people authored a Colleagues’ Memo and one were on the 
committee if they could participate in that deliberation and asked it to be specified who it 
would apply to. Regarding Function of Committees, it seemed inconsistent that it referenced 
the Council since the Council could not speak at the committee meeting and requested it be 
cleaned up. Page 101 (Page 9 of the Memo), Item F, referenced Committee of the Whole, but it 
seemed that thereafter all reference to the Committee of the Whole had been deleted. 
Concerning Page 9, Item C, Creation and Appointment, she voiced it would be helpful to 
estimate the time needed (once a month for an hour, etc.) for members participating on an ad 
hoc committee.  
City Attorney Molly Stump replied it was correct that the Council could not address something 
being referred to a standing committee, that the public would need to be noticed, and it would 
be addressed at a later date. Council members would submit matters to the Council under the 
Colleagues’ Memo process. This was not a matter for local policy and was a requirement of the 
Brown Act and applied to not just a Council member who signed on to a Colleagues’ Memo but 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
any Council member who was not on the committee, that they may only observe and not 
speak. If two people authored a Colleagues’ Memo and one were on the committee, it was not 
intended that they could not participate in that deliberation. She commented the language 
should be clarified to reflect any Council member not on a standing committee who attended 
the committee meeting could not speak even as a member of the public, so it could read 
including Council members who authored a Colleagues’ Memo.  
City Manager Shikada indicated the paragraph related to Council members submitting matters 
to the Council was addressing a Council member not being a member of a committee being 
able to speak at the committee, which would be a Brown Act issue.  
Council Member Tanaka agreed with Council Member Lythcott-Haims on Section 1.1, the 
Organization of City Council.  
Council Member Burt queried if the intended language on Page 6 of the redlined packet, 
Function of Committees, was to be the committee and the public. He thought the term 
“expressly delegated” was too narrow and maybe needed to read “except as matters under 
guidelines provided by the Council” or “expressly delegated to the committee.” Under Public 
Participation, he asked what “if extended public participation is desired, the Chair may provide 
for a longer period” was referring to. He suggested that it reflect individual speaker time would 
typically be three minutes and leave the language in giving greater latitude.  
City Manager Shikada stated the Public Comment section could be clarified to reflect the intent 
of Council.  
City Attorney Stump declared that “extended public participation” under the Public 
Participation section was meant to provide flexibility on the total amount of speaker time or 
the amount of time per speaker.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains confirmed “extended public participation” under the Public 
Participation section was related to the amount of time an individual speaker would be allowed 
to speak.  
Council Member Lauing suggested the assignment of mayor by rotation be placed at the end 
because there was a year to figure it out, and he thought there would be debate. He had a lot 
to say about it but would not speak to it currently. As for Packet Page 98, he concurred with 
Council Member Veenker and wondered if there should be more than the first full sentence 
there to identify the function of committees. Studying the current or perspective Council 
agenda items would probably not air all sentiments and expression of opinions. It did not seem 
clear. It should be noted the public could continue to speak at meetings.  
City Attorney Stump expressed the language of the function of committees was old language 
and it could be worded differently.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Council Member Burt stated Page 8 of the Memo, New Language, referenced adding other 
standing committees and listed Finance, etc., which were permanent standing committees but 
other committees could become standing committees for a limited time, which would not be 
viewed as a permanent standing committee but functioning as a standing committee and not 
an ad hoc under Brown Act rules.  
City Attorney Stump indicated the word standing did not appear in the Brown Act but ad hoc 
did, so care needed to be taken in how it was used. She explained how standing committees 
could be different in character. Staff intended to add the ones not in the municipal code but 
had been long standing. There were others, which could be added and when they were 
dissolved, they would need to amend to remove them.  
Council Member Burt remarked maybe they would not be listed but allude to the potential that 
they would exist and add language saying other standing committees may be adopted by the 
Council.  
Council Member Lauing noted he liked the first sentence under Function of Committees and 
was not sure more was needed. He was not sure delegation and approval of contracts, etc., 
needed to be specified because none of it could be done without Council approval. The last 
sentence was not helpful.  
City Attorney Stump provided an example of things Rail Committee had done without coming 
back to Council. 
Council Member Burt mentioned the Council could assign things not expressed, and narrow 
actions but would give latitude to a committee.  
City Manager Shikada conceptualized that motions would be taken and voted on for each 
section. To do that, clarity was needed on what would and would not to be changed. He 
suggested there be clarity on what changes would be made in Section 1.  
Mayor Kou thought a motion could be made on the boxes and a vote taken and then a 
determination made. For the wordsmithing, Council may need to provide the concern and have 
staff return with the wording when going back to P&S, so it would not be currently addressed.  
Council Member Lauing wanted to keep the words “actions of the committee should be 
advisory recommendations only” and delete the remainder of the sentence on Page 6, Function 
of Committees.  
MOTION: Vice Mayor Stone moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to approve Section 1 
with the following amendments:  
A. 
Keep the existing language in 1.1 Organization of City Council. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
B. 
Revise the redline in 1.2.1 Function of Committees  to read:  Actions of the 
committee shall be advisory recommendations only to the full Council, except as 
to matters expressly delegated to the committee by Council. 
C. 
Add this language to Section 1.2 B: Policy and Services Committee:   “Other 
standing committees may be adopted by the Council.”   
D. 
The Chair may set public speaking time to 3 minutes. 
E. 
Proposing to amend to read “Council members who are not on a committee may 
attend the committee meeting but only as an observer; they may not speak or 
otherwise participate in the committee meeting.”  
Vice Mayor Stone agreed with the discussion of making sure there would be flexibility regarding 
other standing committees being adopted by the Council. As to B, he agreed with Council 
Member Lauing’s statements regarding redundancy. As for A, he discussed his rationale for not 
supporting the mayor being rotational.  
Council Member Veenker thought it would be appropriate to have a discussion at a different 
time regarding the rotation of mayor. She asked if Page 5, Packet Page 97, meant just Council 
members. She requested the phrase “the Committee of the Whole” be deleted on Page 9, 
Packet Page 101. She supported the motion. 
City Manager Shikada would remove the phrase “the Committee of the Whole.” 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims was stuck by the fact they had clerical changes to the 
language, consent-type changes, and action items. The question of the mayoral selection was a 
much different category of question than the others, and she wanted a commitment that there 
would be a conversation regarding that. Action items that may have been in the handbook 
would deserve more time. Starting with Section 2, she wondered if there was a way to indicate 
clerical issues and put on essentially a consent motion and indicate the items that would be 
deferred for further conversation. She asked if Council Member Lauing had a suggestion as to 
how to handle the mayoral rotation issue. 
Mayor Kou suggested she make a friendly amendment or a substitute motion.  
Council Member Lauing remarked if 1.1 was passed as it was it would not change anything that 
could be done in the future and could be brought up at any point. He commented that all the 
hard items could be moved to the end, which could mean the next meeting.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Council Member Tanaka would like to make an unfriendly amendment on Part A and add 
something to the effect of scheduling an action item this year. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Mayor Kou reminded the Council that the handbook would go back to P&S every year for 
review and was something that could come back to the Council.   
MOTION:  Moved by Council Member Tanaka, seconded by Council member Lythcott-Haims to 
approve Section 1 with the following amendments:   
A. 
Keep the existing language in 1.1 Organization of City Council  & schedule an 
action item discussion later this year  
B. 
Revise the redline in 1.2.1 Function of Committees  to read:  Actions of the 
committee shall be advisory recommendations only to the full Council, except as 
to matters expressly delegated to the committee by Council. 
C. 
Add this language to Section 1.2 B: Policy and Services Committee:   “Other 
standing committees may be adopted by the Council.”   
D. 
The Chair may set public speaking time to 3 minutes 
E. 
Proposing to amend to read “ Council members  who are not on a committee 
may attend the committee meeting but only as an observer; they may not speak 
or otherwise participate in the committee meeting”  
Council Member Tanaka stated at least three other Council members wanted to have a more 
in-depth discussion regarding mayoral rotation, which should be honored. It had been 
discussed in P&S and passed.  
Vice Mayor Stone remarked it passed as a 2-3 vote in P&S. He thought the process of having 
this come back as a Colleagues’ Memo was the best step forward. He was concerned that 
scheduling many action items would produce a burdened schedule.  
Mayor Kou mentioned again that reviewing the handbook returned every year to P&S.  
Council Member Burt believed the current policy was the correct one, so he would not support 
coming back for a prolonged discussion.  
Council Member Lauing provided his reasons for being comfortable with the original language 
as opposed to the amendment, in spite of favoring more discussion.  
MOTION FAILED: 4-3, Lauing, Stone, Kou, Burt No 
City Attorney Stump recommended Council call out uncontroversial clerical errors on items that 
were very straightforward and that Council consider those taken care of by staff, and they 
would not need to be addressed in a subsequent motion.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Mayor Kou returned to clerical errors in Section 1. There was a letter B but no letter A where 
P&S Committee was referenced on Page 8. She asked if it was necessary to put “per speaker” 
for speaking time on Page 6.  
City Attorney Stump declared there were some formatting changes that needed to be made, 
which staff would do. They would add “per speaker” on Page 6.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains mentioned that would align with fixing the table of 
contents.  
Mayor Kou progressed to Section 2, City Council Conduct with Palo Alto Boards and 
Commissions.  
City Manager Shikada remarked there was an interest coming out of the P&S Committee 
discussion in what was termed meeting efficiency, so there may be some areas for the Council 
to consider related to the organization of the meetings in the interest of efficacy. Staff had 
flagged policy issues related to AB2449, Remote Attendance, and the timing of Colleagues’ 
Memos and how they would be handled near the end of the calendar year or terms of Council 
members.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains flagged that P&S had not voted unanimously as to the 
number of times a meeting could be attended remotely by a Council member.  
Mayor Kou thought attending five meetings remotely was too many. Regarding Page 13, 
Number 2 iii, she noted that disruption to the meeting broadcast would stop City business, 
which disturbed her. She proposed that a Council member having X number of failed attempts 
to connect would have to declare their absence. An event of a Council member not being able 
to connect or there being continued disruptions concerned her. 
City Attorney Stump stated the requirement regarding remote attendance was in the new 
AB2449, and the way it was drafted was broader than necessary. The law only required that 
procedure apply to meetings in which a Council member was using emergency circumstances or 
just cause, so it could be moved somewhere else in the document to be clearer. It would not 
require the meeting be ended but would require no action be taken, so a pause would need to 
occur while the technical problems were addressed and everybody was back in the meeting. 
She commented on what the law said and her concerns of a Council member reconnecting to a 
meeting. If the rule Mayor Kou described was used, all Council members would need to 
understand they would be out for the rest of the meeting.  
Council Member Bert asked if Page 13, Number 2 iii meant the Council as a Whole. 
City Attorney Stump affirmed the Council as a Whole could not take action, and it should say 
Council, not Council members.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Mayor Kou opined that a Colleagues’ Memo should be on the agenda before the end of that 
Council member’s term. She suggested a Colleagues’ Memo, after receipt by staff, have a 
timeline to be placed on the agenda.  
City Attorney Stump was concerned there may not be enough time to do legal research, if it 
was needed, if a timeline of getting Colleagues’ Memos onto agendas was stipulated.  
City Manager Shikada indicated a specific timeframe was not necessary, but they would 
operate accordingly if that was what Council wanted.  
Council Member Bert accepted the proposed language on Page 17 as it was not restrictive with 
a Colleagues’ Memo being submitted late in a Council member’s term, with an expectation that 
it would come before the Council during that Council member’s term as well. He did not know if 
it should be put in writing, but a Council member should consider the timing, and staff should 
attempt to get it to the Council while that member was serving. He was looking at the 
document version prior to the most recent update, which he thought was better language. He 
asked how the language got changed.  
City Attorney Stump recalled P&S voted 2:1 to change the language.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims suggested that Section 2.1 acknowledge the meetings would 
start at 5:00 and call them regular meetings versus calling them special meetings. Regarding 
Section 2.3, Attendance Procedures, it was possible there was a violation of the labor code by 
asking City employees, Council, and staff to work up to 7 hours continuously with one 10-
minute break. It was imperative to figure out how the City work would be done without 
meeting into all hours of the night routinely. She proposed a restatement of language in 2.1A 
that would state Council hold three regular meetings a month from 5:00 to 10:30 p.m. and 
endeavor to additional meetings or continue the meeting past 10:30 p.m. only in the case of 
emergencies. Putting it in writing may help put it in practice. She supported the change for five 
meetings for Council and five meetings for committees being permissible as remote in Section 
2.3B.  
City Attorney Stump specified the handbook language would need to be amended to make 5:00 
the regular start time, but an ordinance would also need to be amended because the 6:00 start 
time was in the Municipal Code. 
Council Member Veenker voiced that meetings starting at 5:00 could be a hardship for working 
people, so she was not sure if she would support the 5:00 hour, although she supported the 
concept behind it. She asked for an explanation of a special meeting cycle.  
City Manager Shikada answered that the term special described a meeting starting at 5:00 
rather than 6:00. The meetings could start at 6:00, but with full agendas, it could potentially 
require more or later meetings.  
Discussion ensued regarding start times of 5:00, 6:00, and 7:00. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
City Attorney Stump indicated the meetings should start at 6:00 or the code should be 
amended to start meetings at 5:00 if the meetings would always start at 5:00. She stated it 
would be a good practice because there were actions that could only be taken at regular 
meetings. She indicated that a special meeting could be adjourned to have a regular meeting so 
certain limited actions could be taken, which she did not support doing such. 
Council Member Veenker would not suggest any amendments to the meeting start time now 
and hoped the Council could later discuss the issue. Regarding Item C, Supporting Reports and 
Materials, she asked that the supplemental memoranda not be new material at the meeting if it 
was previously available. She did not know if the language needed to be amended. Regarding 
remote participation being five, she inquired how that agreed with the State law of no more 
than two. She queried if the AB2449 remote attendance procedures were supplemental, 
alternative, or in addition to the other requirements. She questioned if one was attending 
remotely and there was a closed session and it was not possible to be in a private place for the 
session if one could sit out of the session and return to the meeting. 
City Manager Shikada indicated that supplemental material was presented at the meetings 
because it was not available at the time of the base packet.  
City Attorney Stump clarified there were two formulas in the State law regarding remote 
participation, which were mandatory for using that type of remote participation. The five times 
per year was a City-level policy for all types of remote participation. That type of participation 
was the just cause and the emergency. One could do something other than just cause or 
emergency. The traditional Brown Act procedures could be used.  She believed Council 
intended AB2449 remote attendance procedures to be supplemental, alternative, or in 
addition. It allowed a different set of procedures for some of the five remote attendances. She 
understood that Council stated a Council member could participate remotely in a Council 
meeting only five times per year, so one may never qualify for AB2449 or may choose not to 
use it. She covered some of the requirements of AB2449. Regarding attending remotely and 
there being a closed session where it was not possible to be in a private place, one could step 
out for that portion.  
Council Member Tanaka thought 6:00 meetings should be adhered to and wanted meetings to 
be at 6:00, not 5:00. He agreed with the concept of a cutoff time for the meetings. He thought 
meetings could be run more efficiently and that the timer should be used more. He encouraged 
everyone to read the book The Mythical Man-Month. He thought remote attendance should be 
allowed at least five times a year for Council meetings and five times a year for each committee 
one might be on. The Colleagues’ Memo should be heard before a Council member’s term 
ended, and there should be a timeline.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims stated it was the Council’s way of being that would have to 
change to manage the length of time of the meetings by addressing fewer issues and speaking 
more efficiently. She wanted to see a commitment to that kind of discipline. She voiced that 
regular meetings starting at 6:00 was more equitable than starting at 5:00.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
MOTION Moved by Mayor Kou, seconded by Council Member Burt to approve Section 2 with 
the following amendments:  
A. 
Number of remote appearances to be no more than 3 times per year 
B. 
Modify General Procedures for Appearing Remotely iii “after five tries to 
reconnect that the Council Member is considered absent”  
C. 
Council Members nearing the end of their term desiring to submit a Colleagues’ 
memo should consider submittal timing and steps needed in order to ensure 
Council discussion prior to the end of their term 
Mayor Kou voiced that all ran to serve on the Council and many knew what to expect. The City 
needed to be in continuous movement. She believed it was democratic to allow questions and 
represent the community and for the community to be able to provide public comments. 
Meeting efficacy was a challenge. She thought Council members should be present and ready 
to do the work.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims reiterated her concern of remote attendance being three 
times per year. She would need to attend remotely more than three times in a year. She opined 
that remote attendance worked. In this modern era, the Council should be able to have that 
flexibility.  
MOTION: Moved by Council Member Lythcott-Haims and seconded by Council Member 
Veenker to remove Item A: Number of remote appearances to be no more than 3 times per 
year. 
Mayor Kou indicated it was unfriendly amendment.  
Council Member Veenker agreed there should be a remote attendance limit of five times. She 
would support this and count on each Council member to use their good judgment and 
commitment to the City as they decided how they would attend.  
Council Member Lauing did not think being remote was as good as being in person, but 
attending remotely was better than an empty seat. He did not think the difference between 
three and five was material relative to the total load. He was comfortable supporting five 
remote attendances.  
Council Member Tanaka thought five remote attendances made more sense than three. He 
thought attending remotely was more effective and that remote public speakers should be 
allowed to turn their camera on. Attending remotely was also better for the environment. He 
supported this amendment and wanted to support the diversity of Council members, not just 
those wealthy enough to not have to work.  
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Kou No 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to make a friendly amendment to enable public participants’ 
video. He believed it was much more engaging and improved communication with constituents.   
Mayor Kou did not accept it.  
MOTION: Moved by Council Member Tanaka, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to 
add to Section 5 to explore the ability to enable video for members of the public.   
Council Member Tanaka wanted to encourage as much public participation as possible and 
believed video was much more effective than voice only.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims agreed. She wanted the decision of whether to be visible to be 
the participant’s rather than that of the Council.  
Council Member Lauing requested to know the implications if there were many public speakers 
wanting to attend by video.  
City Clerk Lesley Milton stated when the Council first started using Zoom there was a technical 
issue with disconnecting people, and she did not know if that had been fixed. Video was not 
allowed previously because of that technical problem.  
City Attorney Stump stated there was a legal issue with people engaging in behavior and 
exposing members of the public to inappropriate imagery, and they had to be cut off.  
Council Member Lauing queried if it was going to be only suggestion how it could be part of the 
motion if the attorneys and the clerk had to investigate it and come back to the Council later.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains voiced this point was the public interacting with the Council 
as opposed to the Council’s participation. The reorganization of the handbook would place this 
in Section 5. 
Mayor Kou indicated that she had seen a speaker come on with propaganda in the background 
completely off topic, which was concerning.  
Vice Mayor Stone concurred with Mayor Kou’s point. It presented issues regarding the 
limitations of government censoring speech that could be in the background. It was an added 
complexity that would not further the public dialogue. He would not support D.  
MOTION PASSED: 4-3, Kou, Lauing, Stone No 
FINAL MOTION: Moved by Mayor Kou, seconded by Council Member Burt to approve Section 2 
with the following amendments:  
A. 
Number of remote appearances to me no more than 3 times per year 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
B. 
Refer to Policy and Services Committee to explore modifications to General 
Procedures for Appearing Remotely iii “after fifteen minutes attempting to 
reconnect that the Council Member attending remotely is encouraged to declare 
him/herself absent for the remainder of the meeting”.   
C. 
Council Members nearing the end of their term desiring to submit a Colleagues’ 
memo should consider submittal timing and steps needed in order to ensure 
Council discussion prior to the end of their term. Staff will make best efforts to 
agendize such memos prior to the end of the Council term.  
D. 
Add to Section 5 to explore the ability to enable video for members of the public. 
Mayor Kou asked if the wording in regard to B was sufficient and if there should be something 
about a Council member being considered absent if they were not successful in connecting. She 
was concerned that Council members attending in person would be waiting for the Council 
member attending remotely to reconnect, which would cause the meeting to go late into the 
night if business was going to be completed. She thought about referring it back to P&S.  
City Attorney Stump was concerned that a Council member would not be able to return to the 
meeting if there was a very important item coming up. She did not know who would have the 
authority to prevent an elected Council member from attending a meeting. A situation could be 
created where the Council’s action taken during the time of the technical issue could be at risk. 
It could be referred back to P&S. She suggested leaving the rule as drafted, which was a 
statement of State law, and she could make it narrower so it would apply to only situations 
when a Council member was using emergency circumstances or just cause. It may have been 
fairly rare because the circumstances were fairly narrow. This rule did not have to apply for 
regular standard remote, which may have taken care of a lot of the concern.   
Discussion ensured regarding the language of B, the circumstances under AB2449 allowing a 
Council member to continue to participate remotely if they had technical issues, and the 
difficulty of an elected official telling another elected official they could not vote on an item. It 
was decided, as the law was new and the idea of considering a Council member absent due to 
technical issues was new, it would be referred to P&S, and the City Attorney would have a 
greater opportunity to consider the matter. 
Mayor Kou queried regarding B if the language in the handbook would remain as it was in the 
handbook. 
City Attorney Stump recommended the language remain as it was in the handbook.  
Council Member Veenker suggested changing the language in B to read after 15 minutes of 
attempting to reconnect that the Council Member attending remotely would be encouraged to 
declare him/herself absent for the remainder of the meeting. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
City Attorney Stump noted that language resolved her concern, and that it would not need to 
go to P&S. The wording of the Council member being encouraged to declare him/herself absent 
versus being required to declare him/herself absent indicated that Council member would be 
taking on the responsibility and there would not be a problem of who would have the ability to 
require it.  
Council Member Burt commented that it needed to be researched if there was an issue of it not 
being covered by the State law and, therefore, was within the discretion of Council policy, so it 
would still need to go to P&S.  
Mayor Kou understood there was the State law AB2449 and then the City regulations which 
was the remote attendance.  
City Attorney Stump expressed AB2449 would apply only if a Council member was using 
AB2449. It was within the Council’s discretion with or without AB2449 to say there would be no 
remote participation. She was concerned that the Council member not being able to come back 
for a later item would put the City at risk because AB2449 stated action taken while the Council 
member’s technology was down was subject to challenge. AB2449 applied to just cause and 
emergency circumstances.  
Council Member Burt suggested deleting cause and emergency circumstances, follow the State 
law on those circumstances, and expand remote participation. In the cases where it had been 
expanded, Council would not be obligated under the terms of AB2449 and Council could set the 
rules for that. The rule for remote attendance needed to be in the procedures when not using 
AB2449.  
City Attorney Stump stated there was not a problem if the Council member was not under 
AB2449. The rule saying the City’s action would be at risk if the technology was down was a 
new piece of State law part of AB2449 and applied only to AB2449. The rule for remote 
attendance when not using AB2449 would be an enforcement issue that was up to Council, and 
it would not be staff telling a Council member they would not be connected or that they were 
dismissed.  
Mayor Kou mentioned that under iii, it read that AB2449 would apply to both standards of 
remote attendance.  
City Attorney Stump voiced that was how it was drafted, and she could move it to a different 
section so it would be clearer. Someone suggested adding the phrase when a Council member 
was participating under AB2449. Either way was fine.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
[The Council took a five-minute break] 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Mayor Kou proceeded to Section 3, City Council Meeting Order of the Agenda. She asked if the 
high-dollar value referenced on Page 21, Section 3.7, needed to be defined as there were 
different contracts, some of which were necessary and others that should be put on the agenda 
to inform the community and there could be conversation. Concerning Page 23, Section 3.8, she 
inquired if oral communications had been allowed in the past for the City Manager comments.  
City Manager Shikada expressed it was within Council’s discretion to define the high-dollar 
value referenced in Section 3.7. He indicated why there had been flexibility on it in the past. To 
his knowledge, oral communications had not been allowed in the past for the City Manager 
comments. It was set up largely for announcements. It was an item the Council would take 
action on.  
City Clerk Milton shared that she had received comments from the public that they were 
frustrated that general public comments for items not on the agenda were not at the beginning 
of the meeting. It was up to the Council if the agenda was to be reordered.  
Mayor Kou declared that was another item for colleague consideration. 
Council Member Veenker inquired if study sessions could be placed after action items, which 
would help advance public comment to an earlier time, and more important decisions could be 
addressed earlier in the meeting. She queried if Council member questions related to 
announcements or things not on specific action items could be earlier in the agenda. She voiced 
that the language at the end of the last sentence on Page 18, Item A, Closed Session 
Requirements, Number 4, Attendance, needed correction. She pointed out a typo at the top of 
Page 22, Item B, Administrative Matters, Item 7 – the Director “of” Planning and Development 
Services. She questioned if on Page 23, Item 4, it should be noted that it would take four 
Council members to request an item be removed from the Consent Agenda if it was for a 
second reading.  
City Attorney Stump acknowledged they could note that it would take four Council members to 
request an item be removed from the Consent Agenda if it was for a second reading. 
Council Member Burt noted that Page 23 stated, “Council members who intend to request to 
remove an item should inform the City Manager’s office,” and he would be more comfortable 
with the wording “should stive to” or something to that effect as the word “should” could be 
interpreted as a requirement as opposed to an obligation the Council would strive to. Regarding 
3.10, he suggested Council comments follow the City Manager comments. He thought it was 
best to keep the study session earlier in the meeting, as agenda changes could be done to 
change the sequence of a given meeting.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims noted that 3.7, Consent Agenda, referenced A, B, C, 2, 3, 4 and 
did not include a number 1. She loved the idea of the study session being last on the agenda 
and the actions items being done sooner and would like to experiment with to see what it could 
do for the efficiency and the overall length of a meeting.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Council Member Tanaka expressed that most of the public commented on action items and 
thought the action items should be first on the agenda, which would allow the public to speak 
sooner on the items. Optimizing the agenda may be having the order as action items, study 
sessions, consent items, City Manager comments, and Council member comments. He opined 
that two Council members should be able to pull a consent item because the Colleagues’ Memo 
required two Council members.  
Council Member Lauing did not disagree with the agenda order change, but noted that the 
amount of public comment on a study session should not be underestimated. He pointed out 
that items considered after 10:30, on Page 18, referenced new items. Regarding Page 22, Item 
C, he was glad to see it instituted in the interest of efficiency and recognizing the work of the 
commissions.  
Vice Mayor Stone suggested that the Mayor agendize a future study session at the end of the 
meeting as a test before any changes were made. He liked the suggestion of moving up Council 
member comments but was worried it may be another opportunity to pontificate and would 
add 20-30 minutes to the meetings. He voiced that Council members being able to move an 
item off consent would add more to action items, meaning more later meetings. 
Council Member Tanaka wondered why items that had passed boards or commissions 
unanimously were reconsidered by the Council. He supported streamlining to boards and 
commissions, which would decrease unnecessary workload on the Council.  
MOTION Moved by Council Member Burt, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to 
approve Section 3 with the following amendments:  
A. 
Section 3.4: Council members who intend to request to remove an item, add 
“strive to” inform the City Manager’s Office  
B. 
Move the section Council Comments to occur after City Manager Comments   
C. 
Move the section City Manager Comments to occur before the Consent Agenda  
Council Member Tanaka thought study sessions should be later in the meetings and asked if the 
maker and seconder would be open to that.  
Council Member Burt was not open to that as a policy change but was willing to encourage the 
Mayor to look for an opportunity to try it.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims agreed it should be considered by the Mayor but not be put in 
policy.  
Council Member Veenker supported the motion.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Mayor Kou announced the Council was moving to Section 4, Procedures at City Council 
Meetings.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains indicated not many things in the section changed and was 
mostly to clean up language.  
Vice Mayor Stone mentioned there had not been strong directive from P&S regarding Council 
member speaking time and thought it would be left to each individual Council member to 
enforce themselves but, ultimately, the mayor or the vice mayor would enforce time limits.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims supported what was written in Section 4 regarding speaking 
time.  
Council Member Lauing asked if Number 6 on Page 26 meant 5 votes were needed with a 7-
person quorum.  
City Attorney Stump stated that was the traditional Robert’s Rules. She noted the reason for 
the supermajority.  
Council Member Veenker questioned the language of Item A1 and asked if that indicated the 
mayor’s permission was needed to make a motion. She did not understand the first sentence of 
Page 29, Item 11 and how a motion to reconsider could happen during an adjournment. She 
asked if the contacts referenced on Page 31, Items 4 and 5 were the same contacts if it could 
indicate it meant the same contacts. She wanted to make clear that it was all the contacts they 
were tracking.  
Mayor Kou stated that in the past that time was provided for questions and comments and 
then motions asked for. If a motion was made early, there may be more questions about the 
motion.  
City Attorney Stump indicated it was a matter of politeness and orderliness, but she did not 
think anyone would stop a Council member from making a motion. The language could be 
changed to “should seek.” In reference to a motion to reconsider happening during an 
adjournment was a technical term and the practice had not been used with this Council. She 
indicated that a meeting could be adjourned to the immediate next day without re-noticing it if 
business had not been finished, which was lawful under the Brown Act and was called an 
adjourned meeting. Related to contacts referenced on Page 31, Items 4 and 5, it could be 
indicated that it meant the same contacts, but she declared that disclosure protected the City.  
Council Member Burt thought a timer was useful for speaking time. Comments should be aired 
but not repeated. He suggested keeping the five minutes in the first sentence, but he favored 
language of “The Council shall be guided by the speaking time set by the presiding officer and 
shall conclude comments beyond the allotted time at the direction of the presiding officer.”  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
MOTION Moved by Council Member Burt, seconded by Vice Mayor Stone to approve section 4 
with the following amendments:  
A. 
 Modify A1: Should Seek permission of the Mayor before making a motion 
B. 
Modify 4.3.15: The Council shall be guided by the speaking times set by the 
presiding officer and shall conclude comments at the direction of the Presiding 
Officer. The presiding officer shall endeavor to treat all members equitably.  
Vice Mayor Stone remarked that the motion articulated the balance P&S was seeking for 
speaking times.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Mayor Kou moved to Section 5, How the Public Engages with the City Council.  
Council Member Veenker commented that Page 35, Item F did not address those not in Council 
chambers. 
City Attorney Stump noted that staff would fix that. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims opined that, related to Section 5.1D, notice should be given to 
the public related to the time they had to sign up for public comment and proposed adding the 
sentence regarding that from the agenda to Section 5.1D.  
City Clerk Milton mentioned that the front page of the agenda had instructions for public 
comments, which is what they had been implementing. Any modifications made should be 
consistent in both the agenda and the procedures and protocols.  
Council Member Burt specified it needed to be made clear when the cut off for signing up for 
speaking time would be, and the mayor needed to know about how many speakers there would 
be to determine speaking time, so there needed to be a forewarning. He provided suggestions 
related to determining when the cut-off time would be for public speakers to sign up. Regarding 
time limits, circumstances of speaking time was the number of speakers and whether there was 
a critical item on the agenda, which may require more time to speak.  
Discussion ensued related to procedures and possible language in the handbook in regard to 
speaker time limits and cut-off times for signing up.  
MOTION Moved by Council Member Burt, seconded by Council Member Veenker to approve 
Section 5 with the following amendments:  
A. 
Under 5.1C Time Limits:  Replace “…are many speakers or items on the agenda” 
with “…are many speakers, number of items on the agenda, or items anticipated 
to be lengthy” 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
B. 
Modify 5.1D to Add: “Approximately 5 minutes before cutting off submission for 
the public to request to speak on an item, the Mayor will endeavor to announce 
the pending cut off time.” 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
City Manager Shikada suggested setting a goal to make it through Section 8 tonight and leaving 
protocols for a future date.  
Mayor Kou announced Section 6, City Council Questions on Agenda-Related Items, would be 
addressed.  
Council Member Veenker would relate a typo to staff offline.  
MOTION Moved by Council Member Burt, seconded by Council Member Lauing to approve 
Section 6 with the following amendments:  
A. 
Add language to Section 6.1: Council Members are strongly discouraged from 
asking questions already addressed in the staff report.  
B. 
Add language at the end of Section 6.1: “If the staff report is incomplete by 5:00 
PM Thursday, that there is an extension to submit Council Questions until 5:00 
PM on Friday”.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Mayor Kou proceeded to Section 7, Annual Council Priority Setting Guidelines.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains clarified that this section was a separate policy altogether, 
which had been pulled into this document, and though it was all redlined, it was not new 
language.  There were a few changes made to reflect most recent practice.  
Council Member Veenker wondered if Item 2 on Page 38 could be revised to say 2 to 3 specific 
objectives within a priority may also be selected and should generally have a 2-year 
achievement goal.  
Council Member Burt was open to Council Member Veenker’s suggestion. He suggested 
changing the language in the prologue statement under Guidelines for Selection of Priorities to 
read shared values to help guide our decisions that: 1) Balance revenues and expenses now and 
in the future, 2) Are environmentally sustainable, 3) Integrate equity, etc., 4) Create a healthy, 
safe, etc., 5) Safeguard public trust, 6) Embrace innovation. This would make the values stand 
alone as simple bullets rather than repeating every frame.  
Council Member Lauing proposed deleting Items 1 and 2 for Guidelines for Selection of 
Priorities and outlined his reasons for such.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Discussion ensued related to the deletion of Items 1 and 2 and possible changes to the 
guidelines for selection of priorities. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims found the placement of the six values strangely located in the 
document and felt they should be at the outset of City Council procedures. She wanted them 
moved to a more suitable place so they would not be buried in the document.  
ORIGINAL MOTION Moved by Council Member Veenker seconded by Council Member 
Lythcott-Haims to approve Section 7 with the following amendments:  
A. 
Revise Item 7.1 to say “Guideline of 3 or 4 priorities per year” 
B. 
Add Item 7.3 in the Guidelines for Selection of Priorities Section to read:  “2-3 
specific objectives within a priority may be selected and generally have a 2-year 
time limit” 
Council Member Veenker preferred not to limit the priorities at the highest level to a three-year 
time limit.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims thought Priorities should to titled differently, as they 
resembled the Values. The specific objectives should be limited in time to two or three years. 
She thought climate and housing would be on the list for a long time.    
Council Member Burt stated the priorities that continued past three years were for the most 
part captured in the values and was the original concept. He gave an example of S/CAP being 
within environment sustainability, and he did not know if the statement needed to be modified 
to make it clearer. He questioned where the value on housing was captured as opposed to a 
focus for the next two or three years to say changes needed to be adopted in zoning, etc., that 
would allow the housing element goals to be met. The goal would not go away when not a 
focused priority but meant the groundwork had been laid and there was a plan of 
implementation and achievement. He struggled with defining values. He believed the priorities 
should be guidance for up to three years, which would not prohibit Council from continuing or 
cutting short a priority.  
Council Member Lauing indicated what Council Member Veenker proposed in terms of what 
was originally called objectives would get to the specific priorities. He thought the public would 
focus on the specific priorities, not the values. He suggested not saying no more than three 
priorities because it would give flexibility to not exclude things, and it was currently more than 
three.  
Discussion ensued regarding the motion, an amendment, revising Items 1 and 2, and adding an 
Item 3, and there was discussion related to priorities, objectives, and values. The Council 
decided to split the motion.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 28 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
SPLIT MOTION Moved by Council Member Burt seconded by Mayor Kou to incorporate the 
following in the motion:   
B.  
Revise Item 2 to say “Priorities should be targeted for up to a 3-year timeframe” 
MOTION FAILED: 4-3, Lythcott-Haims, Tanaka, Lauing, Veenker No 
FINAL MOTION Moved by Council Member Veenker seconded by Council Member Lythcott-
Haims to approve Section 7 with the following amendments:  
A. 
Revise item 1 to say “Guideline of 3 or 4 priorities per year” 
B. 
Revise item 2 to say “Priorities should be targeted for up to a 3-year timeframe” 
C. 
Add Item 3 in the Guidelines for Selection of Priorities Section to read:  “2-3 
specific objectives within a priority may be selected and generally have a 2-year 
time limit” 
D. 
Revise the statement of shared values and move it to the Introduction Section 
a. 
Update the prologue statement “The Palo Alto City Council  universally 
holds these values to help guide our decisions and the work we do. These 
values include that:  
1. 
We will make decisions that balance revenues and expenses, now and in 
the future.   
2. 
We will make decisions that are environmentally sustainable now and in 
the future.  
3. 
We will integrate equity into our decisions, considering how decisions 
affect people differently based on their identity or circumstances.   
4. 
We will make decisions that create a healthy, safe and welcoming 
community for all.   
6. 
We will safeguard public trust through transparent practices and open 
communication.   
7. 
We embrace innovation.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Mayor Kou moved to Section 8, Procedures and Protocols Review and Enforcement.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked for hypotheticals of examples of what a Council member 
might do that would put censure in place. 
City Manager Shikada outlined the discussion P&S had.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 29 of 29 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2023 
Council Member Burt questioned how severe a violation should warrant censure, and would 
censure be considered if there were severe persistent violations or a single egregious violation.  
Council Member Veenker wondered if this should be referred to P&S to set more specific 
standards and guidelines and to discuss what an extreme case might look like. 
Council Member Lauing was happy to sign up for such a discussion. Gradation may need to be 
considered.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims would love to see reference to the City Attorney added as to 
whether censure would be appropriate. She worried that it may be used politically. She would 
like P&S to address this.  
MOTION Moved by Vice Mayor Stone, seconded by Mayor Kou to approve Section 8 with the 
following amendments:  
A. 
Exclude the censure language and refer to Policy & Services Committee for 
language modifications 
Council Member Burt stated there should be guidance that censure would not occur for 
political motivations or reasons.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Mayor Kou asked if the procedures had been approved but not adopted. 
City Manager Shikada thought the procedures had been approved.  
Council Member Burt indicated they had been approved section by section. 
City Manager Shikada remarked that staff could bring back the cleaned-up version of the 
procedures on consent. The protocol section had not yet been approved, and there would be 
another date for that discussion, which he suspected would be after the Committee Work Plan 
discussions. 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
There were none. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:36 P.M. in memory of Tom Jordan and Walt 
Hayes. 
