CITY COUNCIL 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 20 
 
Special Meeting 
 
January 23, 2023 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual 
teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker 
Present Remotely:  
 
None 
Absent: 
 
 
None 
Mayor Kou requested City Clerk Leslie Milton call the meeting to order.   
City Clerk Milton called the roll and noted seven were present. 
Special Orders of the Day 
AA1.  Proclamation for Lunar New Year 
Mayor Kou read a statement regarding the tragedy in Southern California that took place on the 
eve of the Lunar New Year. In addition, she read a proclamation to celebrate and 
commemorate Lunar New Year 2023. She and the entire City Council recognized and celebrated 
Lunar New Year 2023. She encouraged California schools to educate students about the 
traditions of Lunar New Year and the past and present contributions of the API community in 
the State.  
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY 
Subject: Written Liability Claim Against the City of Palo Alto by James Goodrich 
(Claim No. C22-0013) 
Authority: Government Code Section 54956.9(e)(3) 
  
2. 
CONFERENCE WITH LABOR NEGOTIATORS 
City Designated Representatives: City Manager and his Designees Pursuant to Merit 
System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada, Kiely Nose, Sandra Blanch, Nicholas Raisch, 
Molly Stump, and Caio Arelleano) 
Employee Organization: Service Employees International Union, (SEIU) Local 521, 
Utilities Management and Professional Association of Palo Alto (UMPAPA)Palo Alto 
Peace Officer’s Association (PAPOA), Palo Alto Police Management Association (PMA), 
International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF) local 1319, Palo Alto Fire Chiefs 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
Association (FCA),; Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6 (a) 
Public Comment 
There were no requests to speak. 
MOTION:  Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to go into 
Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:05 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at  7:21 P.M. 
Mayor Kou indicated there was no reportable action. 
Study Session 
3.  
Presentation of the Annual Community Survey Results 
City Manager Ed Shikada introduced Assistant to the City Manager Lupita Almos. 
Assistant to the City Manager Lupita Almos stated the study session would focus on the Palo 
Alto Community Survey. She went over a few highlights, including when the survey was 
conducted. It had been conducted annually since 2003. The survey provided insights into 
residents’ perspectives on quality of life, local amenities and services, public trust, etc. She 
indicated what the survey information was used for. She commented there had been a low 
survey response rate, which was attributed to the holiday time frame in which the survey was 
conducted. It would be conducted earlier in the year next year, and more public outreach 
would be done.  
Polco Consultant Kim Daane provided a background of the National Research Center (NRC). 
How the results of the survey could be used were outlined. The methodology of the survey was 
presented. A non-probability, open-participation survey was also conducted, the result of which 
were separate from the probability-based sample survey but was available in the report. An 
overview of the Annual Community Survey results and comparisons to 2020 were furnished. 
Key findings were pointed out, but additional data was in the full report.  
Mayor Kou asked the City Manager how this information would be related to the Retreat. 
City Manager Ed Shikada stated the information was foundational and background information 
for the Retreat. 
Public Comment 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
John Kelley (In Person) did not agree with the summary analysis presented and commented on 
the methodology of the report. He thought the percentage of renters versus homeowners 
responding to the report was noteworthy. Regarding housing affordability, he believed the 
qualitative responses from residents in the report needed to be regarded, not only the 
quantitative information. He asked that housing in Palo Alto be taken seriously.  
Shani Kleinhaus (In Person), an environment advocate for Santa Clara Valley Audubon Society, 
resident, and a Parks Commissioner, not speaking for the Parks & Recreation Committee, stated 
if the data was summarized differently, the quality of the natural environment would be in third 
place, not fourth, in importance to the residents. She requested implementation of some of the 
policies and programs that had not been addressed related to improving the natural 
environment.  
Aram James wanted to know the cost of the survey and to know why an outside agency was 
giving feedback on issues he believed the City already had answers to.  
Mora Oommen, Executive Director of Youth Community Service, suggested including youth 
training in data collection to help address the low survey participation rate.  
Goolrukh Vakil, a downtown business owner, requested the City address utility costs for small 
businesses.  
Council Member Lauing asked for a definition of the variety of housing not scoring well and if it 
was rated distinct from costs [for affordability versus types of housing 3:02:53]; for an 
understanding of the psychology of oversampling of multi-housing units done to improve 
response from hard-to-reach respondents; and if every question was a percentage of residents 
and not necessarily registered voters, which would not align with [inaudible 3:05:54].  
Polco Consultant Daane answered they tried to survey the different types of housing available. 
It was rated independent of any costs, rents, or price. She explained why every survey 
conducted always oversampled multifamily dwelling units. Every question was a percentage of 
residents and not necessarily registered voters. 
Vice Mayor Stone inquired why the response rate was lower this year; if response rates in other 
communities had dipped if done at more ideal times in the year; how residents might be 
engaged more and if it was a topic for the Retreat; and if there was an indication why only 26% 
rated affordable, quality mental health care as positive. He thought the community was asking 
for and needed investment in mental health.  
Polco Consultant Daane commented that one factor of the response rate being lower was 
timing of the survey being around the holidays, but response rates had declined in Palo Alto 
and other communities over the past several years in general. She explained why the overall 
number of responses was good. As far as declining positive responses regarding mental health 
care, more people may have sought mental health care through the pandemic that may not 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
have been available, along with other services that may have declined. It was a trend they had 
seen nationwide.  
City Manager Shikada declared survey participation was not a specific topic for the Retreat but 
it was an issue of ongoing concern and an opportunity to pursue. A number of efforts were 
underway, and they expected to come back to the Council in 60 days or so to talk specifically on 
the topic of community engagement.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked the cost of the survey. She felt renters were 
unrepresented in the survey results and asked staff and the consultants to consider a design to 
ensure responses of renters be received on the frontend. She noted English was the only 
language offered and wondered if that impacted the response rate. She read the verbatim 
responses, which made clear residents’ concerns of the lack of affordable housing. She asked if 
any of the verbatims had been edited, as none were offensive. She was concerned and hoped 
there would be curiosity related the downward trends of Palo Altans’ attitudes regarding ease 
of travel by public transport, affordable housing, etc. It seemed the areas of the Building & 
Planning application process and Land Use Planning & Zoning were issues, as she saw no 
excellent ratings. She wanted the ratings of Area 5 to be contemplated. She hoped there would 
be interest in non-white residents responding differently than white residents when it came to 
the quality of Palo Alto services.  
City Manager Shikada replied the survey cost was just under $30,000, and it was anticipated to 
be $32,600 by 2025.  
Polco Consultant Daane clarified that the verbatim responses were edited for foul language, but 
no responses had been removed as a whole.   
Council Member Burt questioned if there was an ability to increase mental health services for 
the increased demand, and discussion at the Retreat regarding a decline in providers being 
related to affordable space may have been needed. He wanted to make a distinction of the 
Area 5 results as far as describing the results of those who lived there and those who 
responded to the survey, as the data could have been skewed by self-selection of respondents. 
He addressed there being a drastic decline in the perception of public transportation and City 
services through the website and social media and questioned if the perceptions were lower 
because expectations were higher, which may have skewed results. A deeper dive was needed 
to determine if the perceptions of the respondents reflected the attitudes of the residents. 
Concerning getting an adequate number of renter responses, he was interested in the different 
responses of multifamily residents versus low-density residents whether renters or not. The 
information broken down by renters and homeowners would be very valuable. If renter 
participation increased, it may shift the results. It needed to be interpreted correctly as an 
increase in renter participation may skew year-to-year comparisons going forward. 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
Council Member Veenker mentioned the summary noted a decrease in civic participation, and 
she expressed that participation in public forums put on by private clubs needed to be 
considered as civic participation as well as participation in governmental assemblies. 
Mayor Kou questioned when would be the best time to do the survey and thought the best 
time might be before or the beginning the fourth quarter. Regarding perceptions of Palo Alto 
government, she wondered if some of the questions in the survey could be extracted in order 
to have a face-to-face with the community at the Town Hall meetings. City Council may want to 
have a roundtable with small businesses. She discussed affordable housing and the cost of living 
and there needing to be intentional focus on community needs.  
Polco Consultant Daane recommended avoiding doing the survey in the summer and the 
holiday season and recommended early fall or January through March.  
Council Member Tanaka questioned the value of the survey with the cost involved. He 
explained survey fatigue related to a long survey. He suggested doing a survey at the time 
service was rendered, for example getting a survey at the Development Center or when utilities 
were hooked up. He indicated a net promoter score would allow benchmarking against other 
cities and organizations. He questioned if the survey data was available as a CSV file.  
Polco Consultant Daane could provide a CSV file, which he would email to Council Member 
Tanaka.   
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
No changes 
Public Comment 
 
Leland Francois was concerned with weather and the unhoused. He spoke of amateur radio 
communications, and he was trying to coordinate regional response volunteers to assist 
with [the survey 3:41:36]. With KI6AWN, he was trying to consolidate communications and 
asked Mayor Kou to help convince the City’s OES offices and the voluntary CERT people to 
complement the effort. He could be contacted at [KI6AWN@aol.com 3:42:41].  
John Kelley stated Item 3 on the Consent Calendar for January 30, 2023, was a matter taken 
up by the prior Council on December 12, 2022, which he did not believe the community had 
an adequate opportunity to express its views. He noted the ADU legislation included a bill 
that enabled certain sizes of two-story ADUs as a matter of right in certain parts of Palo 
Alto. He discussed parking to homes within one-half mile of transit. He urged the matter be 
taken off the Consent Calendar and allowing the public to speak to the new Council.   
Aram James would support Council Member Tanaka as Mayor in 2024 and would promote 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims as Mayor in coming years. He was against the Sherriff’s 
Department buying 1,400 tasers.  
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
Greg Schmid voiced his frustration with respect to the Housing Element mandating  there 
could be no review of the jobs growth numbers for eight years. There was a 30-day period 
of public comment, but the Revised Housing Element did not contain the public’s questions. 
He indicated the Council had a legal duty to oversee a public discussion within the next 60 
days. He asked who would benefit from the concentrated jobs growth, who would pay the 
cost, who would get the tax revenues, the impacts of emerging [inaudible 3:53:00], and 
where would families live.  
Phoebe Mota-Judges represented the Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition (PASCC) and 
opined that while Palo Alto had a comprehensive S/CAP, a stand-alone plan was needed 
regarding electrifying buildings.  
Shani Kleinhaus (in Person), an environment advocate for Santa Clara Valley Audubon 
Society, resident, and a Parks & Recreation Commissioner, not speaking on behalf of the 
Commission, outlined why light at night and light pollution was dangerous and presented 
problems with LED lighting.  
Ines Boullosa Dirksen was a representative of PASCC. She asked the Council to reaffirm 
prioritization on climate change in the coming year, that it be set as the number-one 
priority in 2023, and that the Council help raise awareness on the importance of electrician. 
PASCC was happy to serve as a resource in supporting the endeavors.  
Mora Oommen, resident and Executive Director of Youth Community Service, expressed her 
gratitude to the community for celebrating the life and legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. A 
mental health art show had been hosted at the Mitchell Park Community Center, which 
they would host again in the near future. She invited the community to the next 
community-wide Service Day on September 11, 2023.  
Connie Cunningham, with the Housing Commission in Cupertino, urged City Council to 
adopt bird-safe and dark-skies regulations meeting or exceeding those adopted by 
Cupertino City Council in 2021. She recommended the Council create a bird-safe, dark-skies 
ordinance.  
Rose Grymes wished to speak on Item 13, but she was on Eastern time, so she would have 
to withdraw from commenting.  
Mayor Kou proposed she submit written comments.  
Consent Calendar 
4. 
Approval of a General Services Agreement Contract Number C23185605 with Linko 
Technology, Inc. for the Amount of $219,447 Over a Seven-Year Term for Pretreatment 
Program Software 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
5. 
Review and Acceptance of Annual Status Report on Development Impact Fees for Fiscal 
Year 2022 and Adoption of a Resolution Making Statutory Findings under Govt. Code 
section 66001  
6. 
Approval of Contract Number C23186552 With Downtown Streets Team, Inc. for a Total 
Not-to-Exceed Amount of $160,477 for Fiscal Year 2023 for Workforce Development 
Services 
7. 
Parks and Recreation Commission Recommendation to Adopt an Ordinance Amending 
PAMC Section 22.04.220 to Regulate Electric Bicycles and Electric Coasting Devices in 
Parks and Open Spaces  
8. 
Acceptance of the Macias Gini & O’Connell Audit of the City of Palo Alto’s Financial 
Statements as of June 30, 2022 and the Management Letter; Approval of the FY 2022 
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (ACFR); and Amendments to the FY 2022 
Budget in Various Funds, as Recommended by the Finance Committee 
9. 
Adoption of a Resolution to Extend the Appointment of Adriane D. McCoy of Baker Tilly 
US, LLP as Interim City Auditor Through April 30, 2023 
10. 
Approval of Contract with CivicPlus, LLC (C23186719) for CivicRec Recreation 
Management Software for a Period of Six Years in an Amount Not to Exceed $735,065 
(Including a 5% Contingency for Additional Services Amount of $29,229) 
11. 
Adopt a Resolution Establishing the Council Annual Calendar of Meetings, Breaks and 
Council Events for Calendar Year 2023 
12. 
Approval of Recommendations on Process for 2023 Council Priority Setting Retreat 
Public Comment 
John Kelly acknowledged the deaths in Half Moon Bay and Monterey Park and wanted to take a 
moment to mourn the people who died and remember the loved ones they left behind. He 
opined Item 7 went too far in terms of limiting access to people needing the assistance of 
electric mobility devices and the lower-powered electric bikes and urged the regulation not be 
passed but talked about openly by the Council. He urged Item 5  be taken off the Consent 
Calendar and not be acted on tonight because of the $57,420 Parks & Recreation impact fee.  
Arthur Liberman, a Member of PABAC, spoke as an individual and requested Item 7 be removed 
from the Consent Calendar. He submitted a letter earlier listing five reasons for removing it. He 
mentioned a sixth, which was PABAC did not approve the proposed regulation when presented 
in November. He requested PABAC have time to discuss the E-bike regulations, including those 
for the unpaved trails in the Baylands.  
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
Lynn Chiapella commented on Item 7. As a pedestrian, she found people who used E-bikes 
frequently used city sidewalks and would like to see an established speed limit with an 
enforceable regulation.  
Council Members Burt, Stone, Tanaka requested to pull Item 7.  
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 4, 5, 10. 
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Stone to approve Agenda 
Item Numbers 4-6, 8-12. 
City Manager Ed Shikada stated Item 7 would be scheduled for a future Council meeting. They 
were considering February 27 or March 6, 2023. A date would be confirmed and posted on the 
agenda.  
MOTION SPLIT FOR PURPOSES OF VOTING:  
AGENDA ITEMS 6, 8-12 PASSED: 7-0 
AGENDA ITEMS 4, 5, 10 PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka No 
Council Member Tanaka stated Item 4 was a $200,000 piece of software, which Palo Alto was 
paying about 20% more because less of the plant was being used than originally. He would 
continue to vote no on every water-quality project until that had been resolved. Regarding Item 
5, the impact fees had been massively increased and prevented housing being built. As for Item 
10, there was a 15% increase from the prior year, and generally there would be no human cost 
for software licenses.  
City Manager Comments 
 
 
City Manager Ed Shikada acknowledged the terrible news of Monterey Park and Half Moon Bay. 
He remarked on a hate crime issue in Palo Alto’s sibling city of Bloomington, Indiana. Mayor 
Kou had been in touch with Bloomington Mayor John Hamilton. He voiced Palo Alto’s 
recommitment to Bloomington. He spoke of high utility bills and outlined tools available to 
community members. He followed up on tracking weather-related information, which 
continued information would be provided to the community, and additional information was 
on the website. There were new library hours and days at Rinconada and Mitchell Park, which 
was dependent on hiring staff, and additional information would be provided as available.  An 
update was provided regarding upcoming Lunar New Year events and events of Friday Night at 
the Art Center. Upcoming items on the City Council’s agenda included January 28, City Council 
Retreat; January 30, City Council Procedures and Protocols, which was an action item; February 
6, Study Session on the upcoming shuttle service, Gas Powered Leaf Blowers Enforcement, and 
Firearms in sensitive places; and February 13, Study Sessions on Economic Development and 
Buena Vista Mobile Home Park Plan with the County Housing Authority and Mid-Year Budget 
Review. The February 20 City Council meeting was cancelled due to Presidents’ Day. There 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
would be a meeting on February 27, and items may include (although subject to change) the 
Parklets Update and Automated License Plate Reader Technology Next Steps.  
Action Items 
13. 
PUBLIC HEARING / QUASI-JUDICIAL. 575 Los Trancos [21PLN-00196]: Adoption of a 
Record of Land Use Action Approving a Major Site and Design Application for the 
Construction of a new 7,245 Square Foot Single-Family Residence With a new 895 
Square Foot Accessory Dwelling Unit and Associated Site Improvements, on a 5.38-Acre 
Site. Zoning District: Open Space (OS). Environmental Review: Adoption of a Mitigated 
Negative Declaration and Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program.  
Council Member Lauing recused himself from the item and indicated why.  
City Attorney Molly Stump noted Mayor Kou was about to call for disclosures from Council 
members. She oriented the Council to the process and reminded the community what was 
being done. Council was required to make a decision based on material in the formal record. 
Community members had interest and were able to petition and contact elected officials with 
items [inaudible 4:34:07]. She outlined why Council members were asked to disclose publicly 
and to the parties if there had been discussions, a site visit, or documents had been seen that 
were not part of the formal record.  
Mayor Kou asked Council members if they had anything to disclose. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked he had talked to no one.  
Council Member Veenker declared she had had no discussions. She did receive an email 
separate to the ones to all of Council, which had no additional information and was redundant 
with the public record.  
City Attorney Stump requested the email be forwarded to the clerk to be reviewed offline, [and 
which could be placed in the public record 4:35:40].  
Mayor Kou had not received anything nor spoken to anybody.  
Vice Mayor Stone indicated that to the best of his knowledge he had not received any 
information that needed disclosure. He received an email similar to Council Member Veenker’s, 
which he would forward to the clerk.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims commented she had received no information pertinent to the 
item nor had she had any conversations about it. 
Council Member Burt had spoken with Keith Reckdahl and Shani Kleinhaus. He did not receive 
information that was not in the record. He had an email communication, which he would 
forward to the clerk. He visited the site last week, and no one else was present at the time. He 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
saw a significant piece of information that was not in the record, which was the story poles 
showed the proposed project intruded below the dripline of at least one tree.  
City Attorney Stump noted that was a great example of a thorough disclosure. The parties could 
respond if they wished to.  
Planner Emily Foley furnished an overview of the project. Being considered tonight was an 
application for major site and design review. The process was for approval of development in 
an environmentally or ecologically sensitive area. The Planning and Transportation Commission 
(PTC) recommended approval on August 31, 2022. She detailed the site, process of the design, 
and the objectives. The Comprehensive Plan land-use designation was outlined. Additional 
criteria specific to open space was presented, which was in the draft findings in the Staff 
Report. Attention was called to the required 20-foot setback from the creek. A diagram was 
supplied in relation to the creek and the proposed house. She supplied pictures of the creek, 
which she had taken in August and after the rains in January, which indicated the water was not 
beyond the bed of the creek that was visible in August. The project was subject to the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and an initial study and Mitigated Negative Declaration 
(MND) had been prepared and circulated. She outlined environmental factors that were 
considered and the proposed mitigations. Public comments had been received and responded 
to. She covered the changes that had been made in response to concerns raised at the PTC 
meeting. Public comments received in the last day or two had been reviewed, and they were 
prepared to respond to any questions. Staff recommended approval, and draft findings had 
been prepared. Alternative actions included remanding the project back to PTC or providing 
direction to return the project back to City Council.  
Applicant Consultant [____ 4:48:15] provided a brief introduction. Slides of the site were 
furnished. He outlined that the new home aimed to preserve the natural context it was set 
within and to minimize environmental impact. They had not had protest letters, etc., from 
surrounding neighbors. The closest neighbor had provided a letter of support. He addressed 
letters they had received from the regional environmental groups and noted that the applicant 
was working hard to comply with all the regulations of the City, which he outlined.   
Council Member Burt questioned how the project was consistent with the Comp Plan in 
relation to broadening the riparian corridor; in reference to no construction occurring within 
the 20 foot creek setback, how was construction going to occur with the building being 20 feet 
from the creek at certain locations; and if the driveway design was the project meeting the 
environmental requirements or if it was stipulated by the Fire Department.  
Planning and Development Director Jon Lait specified the Council would decide whether the 
project was compliant with the Comprehensive Plan. The setback was a continuation from the 
previous Comprehensive Plan, but the 20-foot setback had not yet been implemented into the 
Zoning Code. In reference to no construction occurring within the 20-foot setback, the 
condition of approval as well as the Mitigation Monitoring Program would require the building 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
to be set back more than 20 feet at the corners in question if excavation was required in that 20 
feet.  
Planner Foley remarked regarding no construction occurring within the 20-foot setback that the 
project would go through the building permit process, and if it was found construction would 
require going into the 20-foot setback, the plans would need to be changed. As for the 
driveway, Packet Page 442, Item 2a referenced the grading.  
Palo Alto Fire Department Hazardous Materials Inspector Scott Woodfin explained the Fire 
Department’s requirements for access regarding the driveway. The Fire Department did not 
design the driveway. The plans were submitted. He had not visited the site.  
Vice Mayor Stone was concerned that the lighting design revisions may not mitigate the 
concerns of light pollution. He asked if the City could enforce that lighting mitigations continue 
once the house was constructed; if conditions of approval could include moving the house 
farther from the creek; if neighboring homes were closer than 50 feet from the creek and if 
there was a precedent for homes being within 50 feet of the creek; and if the impact of placing 
a large occupied home at the edge of a riparian area would impede animal movement. 
Planner Foley remarked the lighting design was a part of the conditions of approval and not 
considered part of the mitigation measures because the lighting did not meet criteria of being 
an impact for CEQA. Doing it as a condition of approval had been done on prior projects in the 
Baylands area. It was something the Council could consider if it was similar. There was a house 
one parcel north of the site that was approximately 50 or 55 feet from the creek.  
Director Lait stated Slide 4 summarized the findings that needed to be made for site and design 
review application. If the Council was concerned about the lighting or the setback, he would ask 
the Council to draw the connection to the findings on Slide 4. There was not analysis for the 
properties other than the house one parcel north of the site.  
CEQA Consultant [____ 5:14:00] stated the biologist who worked on the MND was trying to dial 
on in reference to the impact of placing a large occupied home at the edge of a riparian area 
impeding animal movement  
There was a technical issue with the biologist joining the meeting, which they would return to 
her for comment regarding animal movement after the public comment.  
Council Member Veenker spoke of Packet Page 442, Item 2b referencing a construction fence 
and Packet Page 629, Item 2 referencing over-excavation. She inquired if the solution to over-
excavation could be pushing the structure back. She asked when it would be discovered how 
much over-excavation would be needed. Being that the requirement was a minimum of 25 feet 
at the corners in question, it would seem to require adjustment of the plan.  
Director Lait voiced the intent of the condition of approval was that the building would be set 
back a distance in addition to the 20-foot setback to accommodate any extra excavation 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
needed. They could find out prior to building permit issuance how much over-excavation would 
be needed, but they did not have the construction drawings fully reviewed. The information 
would be ascertained before issuing a building permit. A provision of the condition would give 
administrative authority to approve minor adjustments to the site planning to accommodate 
the changes.   
Council Member Lythcott-Haims specified when property was purchased in Palo Alto, the 
property owner, etc., should rely on the accuracy of existing code. She understood there was a 
wish of extending the creek setback [inaudible 5:20:32] defer to hopes and dreams rather than 
the language of the existing code when determining whether to approve or deny a project.  
Director Lait remarked the nature of discretionary applications had a combination of factors, 
which included objective standards clearly established and written, but the discretionary 
application included findings that needed to be made, which offered opportunity for the 
Council to weigh in the Comp Plan goals and policies to ensure the project was meeting the 
findings. Staff reviewed the project, and there was a recommendation from the PTC, which was 
information to inform, not dictate the Council’s decision-making process. Ultimately, the 
Council would determine if the project was in conformance with the requirements.  
Mayor Kou requested information regarding the underlying land use, which was the Streamside 
Open Space, which was in the Parcel Report. She questioned what was meant by the corridor 
generally varying in width up to 200 feet on either side of the center line of the creek.  
Planner Foley stated the underlying land use of Streamside Open Space was the Comprehensive 
Plan designation, and she referred to Slide 5, which explained the purpose of the designation. 
She outlined what the Streamside Open Space designation was based on. Since the property 
was greater than 200 feet at certain points, she was not sure how it affected the designation.  
Mayor Kou stated it remained to be answered if there could potentially be a 200-foot corridor 
on either side of the creek because of the SOS designation.  
Planner Foley stated the other side of the creek was the Town of Portola Valley. 
Public Comment #13 
Bill Ross (In Person) voiced consistency should be determined based on an established 
standard, which should be determined on furthering without hindering General Plan policies. 
He referenced and explained Government Code Section 65103(b) with regard to stream 
setbacks. He would like to reserve the right for written comment because of the reduction in 
speaking time.  
Lucinda Lenicheck (In Person) reminded the Council that the Audubon Society, the Sierra Club, 
and the Midpeninsula Open Space District asked for better design and a wider buffer. The Palo 
Alto Comprehensive Plan suggested open space area buffers were going to be 150 feet. She 
requested City Council redirect the project.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
Shani Kleinhaus (In Person), not speaking for Parks and Recreation, stated the Audubon and 
Sierra Club submitted comments on the MND and sent an additional letter yesterday. They 
believed the project was inconsistent with the General Plan and did not preserve or enhance 
Los Trancos Creek or the riparian corridor. They had concerns that the MND did not satisfy 
CEQA requirements. She requested providing a much wider setback.  
Lynn Chiapella concurred with the previous speakers. She referenced code enforcement being 
weak and problematic. She mentioned the erosion problem in Los Altos.  
Rani Fischer from the Santa Clara Valley Audubon Society stated they were concerned about 
the project due to its proximity to the creek and the results on wildlife. She listed hazards they 
would like eliminated.  
Dave Poeschel asked that the project and its environmental report be denied. He requested 
setbacks of 100 to 150 feet, which he believed would resolve conflicts among the proposed 
mitigations for the project.  
Connie Cunningham, with the Housing Commission in Cupertino, stated there were dangers to 
birds from glass and all riparian wildlife from light pollution in regard to this agenda item. She 
encouraged Palo Alto to adopt bird-safe and dark skies regulations that had been adopted by 
Cupertino City Council in 2021. The regulations she spoke of earlier in public comments applied 
here. She asked that approval of the project be declined and asked that the homeowner be 
required to implement recommendations that were submitted by Midpen.  
Alice Kaufman was Policy and Advocacy Director with Green Foothills. The Council received 43 
emails from 43 Palo Alto residents asking for modifications to [inaudible 5:43:53] movement 
and to avoid increasing flood risk downstream. She was concerned the homeowner may cut 
down some of the riparian trees and vegetation in the future. She requested the setback be 
increased to a minimum of 55 feet.  
Mark Mollineaux echoed previous statements of Dave Poeschel. He voiced the project would 
have an affordable housing percent of zero and recommended doing more to stop what he 
considered frivolous developments.  
Michael Ferreira, with the Sierra Club, echoed many of the environmental concerns. He 
remarked on odd contrasts between plan and ordinance and did not think the most permissive 
should be the default. He was in favor of moving the building first versus later to accommodate 
potential [inaudible 5:48:46]. He was concerned about the defensible space and the driveway.  
Aram James wanted to know how close the area was to trails and the impact on them. A 50-
foot setback seemed to be the absolute minimum, which should be in the plan. He was 
concerned it could become an Airbnb.  
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
Julie Beer was uncomfortable with the 20-foot setback and her assumption that the Fire 
Department had not visited the site. She hoped the plan would not be approved as it was and 
that there would be a 50 to 75-foot setback.  
Public Hearing opened at [____] P.M. 
Public Hearing closed at 10:45 P.M. 
Applicant Consultant [____ 5:54:18] responded to some of the comments and questions from 
the Council. He addressed excavation and blind-sided and one-sided foundations, which 
different techniques could be explored. They were not proposing or assuming any excavation 
would extend past the 20-foot setback and would make sure the engineering team would 
develop proper construction systems and solutions. He thought there was miscommunication 
of the fire truck access. Two years ago, they met members of the Palo Alto Fire Department on 
the site before planning. He wanted to clarify being 20 feet from the creek versus 20 feet from 
the bank. If they were 20 feet from the top of bank, they were about 40 feet from the creek. 
Based on drawings they had seen for the neighbor at 805, he suspected the 50-foot 
approximation was to the creek and the setback from the top of bank was probably 20 to 30 
feet, which they saw when they walked the site.  
Rincon Consultants Environmental Consultant Abe Leider answered Vice Mayor Stone’s 
question regarding wildlife movement. He explained why the creek was the key wildlife 
movement corridor, not open space. The project was outside the riparian corridor.  
Council Member Veenker remained concerned that over-excavation may be deemed necessary 
and being five feet beyond the perimeter of the proposed residence. In reference to Director 
Lait’s comments that the project could have a different footprint, she specified it would then be 
a different project. The setback issue raised concern about creek side properties and what the 
Council should do. The code said 20 feet but she was not satisfied the application and the 
findings were keeping it within that 20 feet, and she was uncomfortable encroaching into the 
minimal 20-foot setback. She wanted to have a discussion at an appropriate time regarding 
how to move more quickly regarding the Comp Plan and setbacks.  
Council Member Burt noted there were issues with zoning code objective standards, which was 
currently a minimum of a 20-foot setback, but there were other guidelines and policies related 
to open space areas. He wanted to focus on Site Design Finding C, which was at the full 
discretion of the Council as to whether a project met the finding. There were a series of 
requirements within the open space development standards, which the view scape guideline 
was at the forefront, and he gave an example of a project that skewed that standard. The most 
critical environmental protection was the riparian corridor. Standards needed to be built into 
the design and not be left to an unenforced discretion, and the report indicated there would be 
no active monitoring of mitigations. If there was redesign around the driveway, there would be 
space to build without intruding in the riparian corridor. There was also an issue of defensible 
space for fire, which was critical, and that same defensible space would put the structures in 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
the ballpark of the setbacks from the riparian corridor that had been adopted as County 
guidelines. A 50-foot setback, 20 feet from the bank top and a 30-foot defensible space, would 
address fire safety and environmental issues. At the appropriate time, he would make a motion 
to refer this back to PTC to pursue a design that would address those requirements and at the 
same time refer to staff to move forward with implementation of the Comp Plan Policy and 
Programs related to streamside setbacks. He had several concerns with the MND, which 
included the setback, lighting, noise, etc. Considering modification of a project at the permitting 
point was backwards. It seemed the California Department of Fish and Wildlife had guidelines 
that would disapprove the design. The standards of other agencies should be identified to allow 
filtering of what should occur. He was concerned with bank failure, high waterflows, and 
erosion potential. He saw no recognition in the report that the creek and corridor could 
possibly become a greater opportunity for steelhead habitat. He did not believe the project met 
the [Site Design Finding C 6:17:04].  
Mayor Kou wanted to ensure as much as possible that trees would not be removed. Finding D 
was not in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. She did not believe the MND was 
sufficient and thought there should be an EIR. The glass should require bird-safe glazing 
treatment. Eliminating the fencing would impede wildlife movement along the creek. She was 
concerned about nighttime lighting. If there were to be skylights, that was another concern. 
She spoke of her concerns regarding the pool. She did not believe CEQA allowed development 
of best practices being deferred to the future. It should go back to PTC.  
Council Member Tanaka asked the applicant what the application process was like and how 
they ended up in front of the Council; what direction or information from the Council would be 
most helpful in their design passing; and the width of the property. 
Applicant Consultant [____ 6:22:58] indicated they started the project in January 2021. They 
spoke with the Fire Department and the Planning Department. They did research in the open 
space. They went through a preapplication meeting and submitted multiple rounds of planning 
for review. They heard back from the Building Department and Public Works. They designed the 
project based on the zoning regulations and information given to them by the City. There was 
frustration from the design team because they felt they were chasing a moving target. With all 
the comments, there was a lot to consider from the design team side. They tried to follow all 
the prescriptive rules. The riparian edge and fire access standpoints were fairly ambiguous. 
Maybe complying with excavation within the five feet might suffice, but there was talk about 
increasing the riparian edge from a policy standpoint to 50 feet, which would essentially wipe 
out the entire western half of the clearing, and it could render the project infeasible depending 
on the owner’s requirements, and 150 feet would [inaudible 6:27:35]. The width of the 
property varied, but the setback at 50 would be halfway through the clearing, and anything 
more would take over the entire clearing, which would make development impossible. It was 
not clear what they should design toward or what the owner’s expectations should be with the 
Council’s comments of different setback thresholds of 20 to 200 feet. Fire access was a big 
driver and complex because it had a lot of implications on site planning. He discussed what the 
Fire Department needed as far as site access. It was hard to quantify what was enough in terms 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
of light control. There were building code issues with not having windows along the riparian 
edge.  
Council Member Tanaka summed up the issues being top of mind for the applicant as threshold 
from the creek, Fire access, and lighting. He asked staff what would be the legal implications of 
the Council enforcing a 150-foot distance in regard to the riparian edge, which would render it 
impossible for the developer to build. He questioned what distance from the creek would make 
the project infeasible. He queried if it could be stipulated the size of the house be reduced or 
would it be considered taking of property rights and what would be the recourse of the 
property owner. If this went back to PTC, the Council needed to address the things the 
applicant asked about, so there was not a lack of clarity.   
Applicant Consultant [____ 6:30:45] included bird-safe glass being an issue. The extent of what 
would be good enough was a topic.  
Attorney Molly Stump commented the Housing Accountability Act required the project not be 
made infeasible.  
Director Lait expressed he heard 50 feet with a remand back to PTC as a possible motion. A 
study would need to be done to determine what distance from the creek would make the 
project infeasible. Based on the Housing Accountability Act, the Council could not impose 
conditions that would make the project infeasible.  
Attorney Albert Yang expressed the provision of the Housing Accountability Act was that the 
City cannot deny or reduce the density of the project and explained what reducing the density 
meant. There was not a clear line if reducing the size of a home was a reduction of density. If it 
was specified the size of the home was to be reduced, there would likely be litigation seeking a 
declaration that the City had reduced the density of the project in violation of State law. At that 
point, it was unclear if it would be sent back to the City for reconsideration or if a Court would 
take it upon itself to order a specific project.  
Mayor Kou declared that Council had discretionary powers to review this.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims stated for the record that probably all of the Council 
sympathized with the applicant. She reiterated that the applicant consultant had stated they 
tried to do everything right, that they met with Fire and Planning early on, and that they had 
been chasing a moving target. She thought the City had an obligation to not offer people 
moving targets. It had been approved by PTC and came to the Council with staff recommending 
approval with draft findings that the project met site and design objectives, and Council was 
trying to get it to meet a standard not yet articulated.  
Mayor Kou declared public comments would be taken in reference to Item 14 after the 
conclusion of Item 13, and there would be a discussion at a later date.  
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
Fire Chief Geo Blackshire commented for clarification that Fire Station 2 had been staffed 24 
hours a day, 365 days a year since the summer of 2021. Inspector Woodfin said he had not 
been to the site but not that Fire personnel representatives had not been to the site.  
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Mayor Kou to: 
1) 
The Council refer this item back to the PTC for consideration of the following as the 
current proposal does not allow us to make the findings of section C. Request that the 
PTC evaluate project design modifications to meet the following objectives: 
a) 
Evaluate a project design that provides for approximately 50-foot setback from 
the top of bank. 
b) 
Effective bird-safe glazing treatment of all glass surfaces achieving the American 
Bird Conservancy Threat Factor rating of 15.  
c) 
Eliminate fencing that could impede wildlife movement along the creek.  
d) 
Minimize nighttime lighting along the riparian corridor and allow only minimal 
lighting in all other locations. Lighting should not interfere with wildlife 
movement through the landscape, and all outdoor lighting should be limited to 
Correlated Color Temperature of 2700 Kelvin or less, and extinguished at 11 
P.M.   
e) 
Pool should be covered and fenced in a way that ensures that small animals, 
such as amphibians and reptiles cannot enter the swimming pool.  
2) 
Request that staff return to Council with a plan and timeline amend the Zoning code 
Comprehensive Plan Policy N.3.3. and Program N3.3.1 
Council Member Burt stated the project’s design was as close as possible to the creek, which 
was attractive for a homeowner, but the Council’s standards and the standards of multiple 
different agencies respected that there had to be greater protections to this critical part of the 
natural habitat. The pleasure of the property owner needed to be balanced against the 
overriding considerations.  
Mayor Kou expressed that the granting of a permit to build on the land came with responsibility 
to preserve the nature of the parcel. She believed there needed to be more examination. She 
asked Council Member Burt if he would consider a design providing a 50- to 80-foot setback 
from the top of bank and if he would be asking that the MND or EIR be redone.  
Council Member Burt voiced his concern that having a greater setback would necessitate the 
removal of trees.  
Director Lait commented they would review the [MND/EIR 6:45:09] and update it as needed 
based on the redesign.  
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
Discussion ensued related to adding to the motion bird-safe glazing treatment to all glass 
surfaces, eliminating fencing impeding wildlife movement along the creek, eliminating 
nighttime lighting along the riparian corridor, and that the pool be covered and fenced. It was 
decided the items be added to the motion. 
Mayor Kou requested the preparation or exploration of a long-term monitoring program for the 
creek and riparian corridor be added to the motion to ensure no runoff of chemicals into the 
stream compromising the steelhead, etc.   
Council Member Burt commented he hoped the passive design elements would address it, 
therefore not needing long-term monitoring.  
Council Member Veenker agreed with all the Council members. The issue and question was 
how to be responsible and kind to residents and the environment. Residents deserved a 
predictable permitting process, and the Council needed to be good stewards of open space and 
especially streamside open space. She supported the motion and hoped it addressed the four 
things Council Member Tanaka outlined because there should be certainty and predictability to 
the process as the PTC evaluated the issues. She requested an estimation from staff as to how 
long the process of Item 2 in the motion would take.  
Director Lait indicated they were developing a work plan for 2023 and they should be able to 
report to the Council soon. The process itself was not complicated but was a matter of 
balancing it with the other work being done. He thought the work would take six months. He 
was not sure of the start date.  
City Manager Shikada added staff was working on a work plan for 2023, and part of it would be 
City Council discussion occurring on January 28, 2023. He did not know if there would be an 
opportunity to reconcile this specific referral with existing ones, but the Council would see 
follow-up from staff in that context.  
Council Member Tanaka asked how 50 feet was determined as a setback and opined a large 
part of the project would be cancelled due to the 50-foot setback. He asked if the dwelling 
could be built multistory to reduce the footprint. He felt it was unfair that targets were moving. 
He queried of the applicant if anything in the motion would be difficult to comply with. He 
could not support the motion because there was not a predictable permitting process, which 
was unfair.   
Council Member Burt explained how he arrived at an approximately 50-foot setback.  
[Staff 6:58:22] confirmed the footprint could be reduced if the dwelling was multistory.  
Planner Foley thought there were items in the motion that would take additional study from 
the architect. There was concern about increasing the second-floor area and potential views 
from the ridgelines, which could not be evaluated until they had a planner concept. If the 
setback were changed to 50 feet, it would reduce what the applicant was proposing as the 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
clearing space to build the house from about 80 feet to about 50 feet, but they were not in a 
position to make an evaluation judgement on it.  
MOTION PASSED: 4-2, Tanaka, Lythcott-Haims No, Lauing Recused 
14. City Council discussion and direction regarding wage requirements for the contract for next 
Janitorial services  
A. 
Review and Provide Direction on Wage and Benefits Requirements for Inclusion 
in a New Janitorial Services Request for Proposal (RFP) 
B. 
Responsible Contracting Standards Colleague's Memo (Stone & Burt) 
Mayor Kou asked if public comments could be closed due the late hour and then continue 
comments at a later date and if there should be a presentation. 
City Attorney Molly Stump declared it was acceptable to take additional public comments at a 
later date.  
City Manager Ed Shikada remarked it was at Mayor Kou’s discretion whether there would be a 
presentation. Assuming the item would be carried over to another meeting, the presentation 
could be deferred until the second session.  
ACTION: Public comments accepted, but item continued to the January 30, 2023 
[The Council took a three-minute break] 
Public Comment 
Aram James wished to defer his comments until he had heard the entire conversation.  
Cassie Peabody, the Legal Director at the Maintenance Corporation Trust Fund (MCTF), stated 
they believed it was imperative the City of Palo Alto adopt a responsible contractor policy for 
the janitorial contractor and that taxpayer dollars should be used to support such workforce. 
She listed failures of SWA.  
Ruth Silver Taube was Coordinator of the Santa Clara County Wage Theft Coalition and 
supervised the workers’ right practice at the Katharine and George Alexander Law Center at 
Santa Clara University Law School and the Office of Labor Standards Enforcement of the 
County’s Legal Advice Line. In March 2022, janitorial workers in the City of Palo Alto expressed 
concerns about SWA, which she outlined. She spoke of an article she had written in the San 
José Spotlight regarding the wage theft issue. The Wage Theft Coalition supported the 
responsible contracting proposals put forth in a Colleagues’ Memo by Vice Mayor Stone and 
Council Member Burt. The Wage Theft Coalition had put out a wage theft report describing the 
challenges of wage theft.  
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 20 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  01/23/2023 
Lucila Ortiz, the Political Director with Working Partnerships USA, stated the biggest issue they 
saw as wage theft. They supported the responsible contracting proposals and Colleagues’ 
Memo by Vice Mayor Stone and Council Member Burt. They believed the first step in the City 
leading with values of equity and labor harmony was approving the Memo.  
Jose Pavon, a political organizer with SEIU-USWW, urged support of the responsible contractor 
policy and the Colleagues’ Memo being proposed by Vice Mayor Stone and former mayor Burt.  
Yardenna Aaron, Executive Director of MCTF, declared one of the major mandates of their 
watchdog work was investigating wage theft and labor violations to create a level playing field 
for contractors who were following the law and doing the right thing. They were grateful for the 
issue of responsible contracting being raised and supported it in every way and hoped it 
continued to be an example of Palo Alto stepping forward for the entire Bay area.   
Araceli stated the proposal outlined by Vice Mayor Stone and Council Member Burt’s 
Colleagues’ Memo would help ensure Palo Alto’s contracting practices would be in line with its 
values on equity and labor harmony and urged support of the Colleagues’ Memo.  
Mila Zelkha, the District Director for Assemblymember Marc Berman, declared on his behalf 
that he was supportive of the Colleagues’ Memo and was appreciative of the meaningful 
attention toward addressing the claims of wage theft experienced by the City of Palo Alto’s 
contracted janitorial staff. She noted that Assemblymember Berman commended Vice Mayor 
Stone and Council Member Burt for working on the issue and encouraged everyone on the 
Council to support the Memo.  
City Manager Shikada recommended the item be postponed to the January 30, 2023 City 
Council Meeting and recommended the item be addressed before the item on the Council’s 
Procedures and Protocols Handbook.  
Mayor Kou confirmed it would be the first item addressed on January 30, 2023.  
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Mayor Kou announced that Council Member Burt had been elected by colleagues to Chair the 
VTA Board of Directors and was unanimously appointed by the VTA Board to Caltrain’s Board of 
Directors.  
Council Member Veenker thanked Mayor Kou for sending a message of support and solidarity 
to Mayor Hamilton in Bloomington. She stated it was important to stand with all who strove to 
stop Asian hate and race-based prejudice. She thanked City Staff for preparing the statement 
and putting it on the website. She was thrilled the Rinconada library was open on Sundays.  
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 12:19 AM in honor of the victims of the tragedies 
in Monterey Park and Half Moon Bay, California, on January 21, 2023. 
