Council Appointed Officers Committee
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 4
Special Meeting
April 10, 2023
The Chair of the Council Appointed Officers Committee met on this date in the Council
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 3:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Stone
Present Remotely:  
Absent: 
Public Comments
None
Action Items
1. 
Discussion and Recommendation to the City Council on Next Steps Regarding
Appointment of the City Auditor
Public Comments: None
Council Member Burt asked Interim City Auditor Adriane McCoy how things are going and her
thoughts on directions the CAO Committee should consider upon renewal.  
Ms. McCoy stated things are going very well and believes they are in a forward motion to move
on and conduct another annual risk assessment and establish an internal audit plan for the
upcoming fiscal year. 
Council Member Burt asked how they appraise the breadth of risk that should be evaluated. 
Ms. McCoy explained the process for evaluating risks. 
Council Member Burt asked for clarification on the schedule for discussions with council
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 4
Sp. Council Appointed Officer’s Committee Meeting
Summary Minutes: 04/ 10/2023
members over the course of the year.  
Ms. McCoy stated she is proposing monthly or biweekly meetings.  
Mayor Kou asked if the pause on the audits was due to transitioning. 
Ms. McCoy replied yes.  
Mayor Kou asked when the audits were restarted. 
Ms. McCoy stated the audits were restarted just before she was selected as Interim in October
or November. 
Mayor Kou asked what the reason was for the reduction in the contract authorized maximum.  
Assistant City Manager Nose stated the reduction is the result of reducing the annual cost of
contract services as part of the pandemic balancing. 
Vice Mayor Stone asked Baker Tilly Representative Kate Crowley if Baker Tilly planned on
presenting other auditors to fill the role of City Auditor.  
Ms. Crowley replied that Ms. McCoy is the best available candidate for the role, but if the
council had an interest in looking at additional resumes, they would provide those.  
Vice Mayor Stone asked Ms. McCoy if there was anything the council could do for her to make
her job better.  
Ms. McCoy opined that there should be some on-site presence throughout the year to meet
with the council in person. 
Vice Mayor Stone asked the staff if there is anything that needs to be done in Ms. McCoy' s
contract to be able to have more on-site presence.  
City Manager Ed Shikada noted that more on-site presence would have to be factored into the
council' s budget deliberations and would require a contract amendment.  
Council Member Burt asked if the amount of time spent in Palo Alto is specified in the contract.  
Assistant City Manager Nose stated that it is not specified in the contract directly.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 4
Sp. Council Appointed Officer’s Committee Meeting
Summary Minutes: 04/ 10/2023
Ms. McCoy commented that recent task orders included a provision to come on-site to conduct
certain audits but that would be on a case-by-case basis.  
Assistant City Manager Nose asked if there are 10 trips included in a general task order for audit
services.  
Ms. McCoy said yes.  
Council Member Burt asked what is budgeted and planned for in terms of on-site presence.  
Ms. McCoy stated that five work days per task order is the average on-site presence for a 12-
week audit.  
Council Member Burt asked how much on-site presence they had in the last three months.  
Ms. McCoy stated that she has not been on-site based on the last directive that she received.  
Vice Mayor Stone admitted that there might have been an overcorrection and wants to find a
balance to make sure that Ms. McCoy can be on-site but not more than necessary.  
Mayor Kou asked Ms. McCoy how she planned on interacting with the general public. 
Ms. McCoy stated she is open to whatever process the CAO Committee chooses for those
purposes.  
Mayor Kou stated the formal communication route would be updated for the auditor' s website.  
MOTION: Mayor Kou moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Stone to recommend the City Council
appoint Adriane McCoy the permanent City Auditor. 
Council Member Burt stated that he supports the motion based on the recommendation of his
colleagues as he does not have adequate first-hand knowledge to make a judgment. 
MOTION PASSED: 3-0
Future Meetings and Agendas
Council Member Burt asked what the frequency was that the council reviews and approves
renewals for consultants who serve the council for CAO work.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 4
Sp. Council Appointed Officer’s Committee Meeting
Summary Minutes: 04/ 10/2023
City Manager Shikada stated there has not been a regular schedule for that but it is open for
discussion.  
Council Member Burt suggested having a discussion at an upcoming CAO Committee meeting
to define the parameters between the committee and the council as a whole.  
City Attorney Molly Stump stated the discussion could begin with the committee work plans
they were provided.  
Council Member Burt asked if the work plan was broad enough to cover standing committees
that are not specifically mentioned.  
City Attorney Stump stated that there is no supporting material that has been prepared but it
would work to raise the topic and begin a conversation.  
Mayor Kou asked if it is necessary to have an overview of what the committee is at a later
meeting. 
City Attorney Stump noted that there are some issues worth discussing.  
Vice Mayor Stone recommended that Council Member Burt give a brief summary of the CAO
Committee at a later meeting as he has been on the committee the longest.  
Adjournment: The meeting was adjourned at 4:06 P.M. 
