CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 17
Regular Meeting
August 7, 2023
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely:  
Absent:  
SPECIAL ORDERS OF THE DAY
1. 
Neighbors Abroad and Chris Cummings Presentation on Recent Activities with Palo Alto
Sister City Tsuchiura, Japan
CLOSED SESSION
2. 
CONFERENCE
WITH
LABOR
NEGOTIATORS
City
Designated
Representatives: City
Manager and his Designees Pursuant to Merit System Rules and Regulations ( Ed
Shikada, Kiely Nose, Sandra Blanch, Tori Anthony, and Molly Stump) Employee
Organization: Service
Employees
International
Union, ( SEIU) Local
521, Utilities
Management and Professional Association of Palo Alto ( UMPAPA), Palo Alto Peace
Officers’ Association ( PAPOA), Palo Alto Police
Management
Association ( PMA), 
International Association of Fire Fighters ( IAFF) local 1319, Palo Alto Fire Chiefs’ 
Association ( FCA); Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6 (a) 
3. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY- POTENTIAL LITIGATION Claims pursuant to Public
Contract Code 9204 related to construction of the Public Safety Building from Swinerton
Builders; Pacific Structures, Inc.; Commercial Controls Corporation; Walters & Wolf; 
WSA Compliance, LLC; Helix Construction Company; Broadway Mechanical Contractors, 
Inc. ( BMC); Sandis; and Northern Services, Inc. Authority: Government Code Section
54956.9(d)(3) 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Stone moved, seconded by Council Member Burt, to go into Closed
Session. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 08/ 07/2023
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
Council went into Closed Session at 6:00 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 7:20 P.M. 
Mayor Kou announced nothing to report. 
STUDY SESSION
4. 
4075 El Camino Real ( 23PLN-00391): Request for Prescreening of a Proposal to Modify
an Existing Planned Community ( PC) to Allow 14 Additional Senior Convalescent Units, 
Including an Increase in the FAR, Lot Coverage, Density, and Height Within the Daylight
Plane. Environmental Assessment: Not a Project. The Formal Application Will be Subject
to California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Review. 
Emily Kallas, Project Planner, described the Council prescreening process. This prescreening
proposes to add 14 additional units to an existing 121-unit assisted living and memory care
facility. Assisted living is considered a commercial use. The units do not have kitchens and do
not qualify as housing units. She showed conceptual plans demonstrating the daylight plane
encroachment, which varies from 6 to 12 feet. PC projects are required to have a public benefit, 
and this would provide additional housing for seniors. The project deviates from development
standards in that it encroaches into the daylight plane adjacent to single-family houses, 
increases the density by 14 units, and reduces the parking ratio, though parking on site is
sufficient. Staff recommended
that Council conduct a prescreening to provide informal
comments, which are not considered binding.  
Steve Sandholtz, CEO of WellQuest Living, believed this was an important project that would
help maintain the viability of Palo Alto Commons for a long time. He reviewed the project
information and showed the zoning map, landscape plans, and effects on the daylight plane. 
There is a renovation in progress currently to modify some of the common areas. The next
phase would be this unit expansion, followed by exterior improvements.  
Council Member Burt stated his biggest concern was the impact on the daylight plane. He
stated the project was originally designed with the step-downs at the rear specifically to respect
the daylight planes. He asked if the applicant had looked at adding the additional square
footage to the three-story units in the front or to the surface parking area. He also questioned
the current staff-to-resident ratio and the impacts on parking for additional staff.  
Mr. Sandholtz stated they had not looked at those alternatives. It would be difficult to cover the
parking lot because of the flow of traffic to the front door. It was felt the proposed option had
minimal impact and was the most viable to create the least disruption to residents through
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 08/ 07/2023
construction. The added units would be staffed at 1:8 to 1:10, so another 1 to 2 staff would be
added. Most of the employees use public transportation, and the parking is underutilized.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims noted this does not have an affordable component and PC
zones require 20% affordable.  
Jonathan Lait, Planning Director, explained the distinction between this prescreening idea and a
planned home zoning application. The PC is not subject to the PHZ additional threshold
standards of 20% inclusionary and more housing units than jobs generated.  
Vice Mayor Stone had concern around the daylight plane. He felt it would be better to move
the units to the front if possible but that there was an important benefit to 14 additional units. 
He asked if there would be displacement of residents during the time of construction.  
Mr. Sandholtz hoped displacement would be minimal. The current construction of the common
areas is significantly more disruptive. The second phase will be done from the outside in and
not disrupt services in the building. The plan was to retain vacant units leading up to that so any
residents displaced by the construction could be kept in the community.  
Council Member Veenker asked about the need in the community for additional assisted living
space.  
Mr. Sandholtz explained that most residents are admitted after they have had a change in
condition and need to move in quickly. It is not common to have a long waitlist for these units
because it is need based, but this facility stays full and the units are filled quickly.  
Council Member Veenker was also concerned about the daylight plane. She wondered if some
areas of the building that would impact the daylight plane could stay at two stories. She noted
she would be receptive to adding a fourth floor toward El Camino if feasible even though it
would exceed the height limit. She was interested in hearing more about options and impacts
on the residents and neighbors. She noted adding bicycle parking for visitors would be nice.  
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
1. 
Aram James ( Zoom) related his experience with his mother in assisted living. He was
interested in whether the applicant would be receptive to offering a few affordable units
even though it is not required.  
2. 
Mona He, property owner at the corner of the new proposal, stated the current property
already casts a huge shadow in her backyard. She was concerned about the effect of the
loss of daylight if another one to two stories were added. She felt it was unfair to Wilkie
residents.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 08/ 07/2023
3. 
Shashank Divekar, 405 Wilkie Way, behind Palo Alto Commons, echoed Ms. He's remarks
and concerns, including the loss of property values and privacy. He strongly opposed this
expansion.  
4. 
Burt Davies, resident on Wilkie Way, agreed with the previous two commenters and felt
the building was already a huge tower behind where he lives. He remarked on the loss of
privacy and property value.  
Council Member Tanaka suggested that the developer speak to the neighbors and hear the
impacts. He asked about the feasibility of adding a fourth story.  
Mr. Sandholtz stated they were happy to host an open house for people to come and talk about
their concerns and to communicate further to find a win-win solution. He stated adding a
fourth story had not been explored due to the height limitation, but it was also significantly
more expensive due to the infrastructure required. He doubted it would be financially feasible
but it would be explored.  
Council Member Lauing described his experience with a family member in the Commons and
the difficulty with visitor parking. He felt it would help to have more visitor parking available. He
noted concern with the daylight plane and that that was the reason for the step-downs. He also
agreed that, while affordable housing units are not required, the City would like that and
encouraged flexibility with the numbers of units. He stated the exterior renovation was a plus
for the neighborhood.  
Council Member Veenker also felt that affordable housing would be very well received as
assisted living can be very expensive.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims supported the idea of four stories on the El Camino side She
felt this part of the City needed a facelift and was excited about the exterior remodel.  
Council Member Burt questioned if there was discretion as a PC amendment to put a condition
that there be some level of affordable units. 
Director Lait responded that his previous comments were focused more on the application
process but that having affordable housing units would qualify as a public benefit for the
Council' s consideration.  
Mayor Kou was interested in a TDM for this as a commercial property. She was also interested
in a town hall or community meeting and felt that it was important to involve all the neighbors
and residents.  
NO ACTION
AGENDA CHANGES, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 08/ 07/2023
City Manager Ed Shikada stated that Staff had modified and then subsequently reverted to the
original recommendation on Item 10.  
NO ACTION
PUBLIC COMMENT:  
1. 
Katie Rueff speaking on behalf of Larry Klein (in-person), Andrea Gara (in-person), Hilary
Glann ( in-person), Willa Bednarz ( online), Kristy Rueff ( online), of 350 Silicon Valley and
the
Palo
Alto
Student
Climate
Coalition, stated
there
have
been
record-high
temperatures, flooding, and wildfires this summer. She felt that everyone needed to be
active in the community to make sure the policies support all citizens. She noted some key
things to work toward, including reaching the 80x30 goal with room to spare, equitably
electrifying, approving dense housing, and fostering a city that encourages youth climate
advocates.  
2. 
Leland Francois, Ravenswood Industrial Park and KI6AWN, stated he has been attempting
to incorporate Bay Area radio operators to help meet some of the local municipalities' 
demands in the areas of residential transitional response. He hoped to mobilize some
local radio operators in this cause.  
3. 
Annette Glanckopf ( Zoom) noted Midtown' s need to keep Mike's Diner Bar open, stating
the key problems not adequately addressed in the Economic Strategy Report were the
demand for increased rent, increasing operating costs, and inability to get adequate staff. 
She felt the City needed to be more aggressive in its actions to preserve and revitalize
retail.  
4. 
Justin Harper spoke on behalf of the homeless community. He stated each person living
on the street has a unique story and extending a helping hand can empower them to
rebuild their lives. Homelessness is not a reflection of personal failure but a symptom of
systemic shortcomings. A challenge faced by the homeless community is the issue of
proper trash disposal. He wanted local authorities, organizations, and individuals to work
together to explore innovative ways to address this challenge.  
5. 
Angelina Rosh, member of PASCC, asked the City Council to declare a climate emergency
to show the community that the City recognizes the imminent threat to climate change
and will further its pledges to commit to mitigating the impacts of this emergency. She
believed Palo Alto was capable of surpassing the benchmarks established in previous
years to fulfill the ambitious goals set long ago.  
6. 
Maya Perkash, member of PASCC, stated she has researched how different states have
handled the transition from gas to electric appliances and learned that aggressive action, 
with proper incentives and measures, was necessary to see any significant change in
electrification. She felt it was crucial that Palo Alto prioritize the gas sunset date and
asked the Council to recognize this opportunity and urgency in consideration of the 2030
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 08/ 07/2023
goal as any action not taken now will have an exponentially larger impact in the years to
come.  
7. 
Julia Zeitlin, co-founder of PASCC, asked the Council to reinforce prioritization and support
of bold climate action for the remainder of 2023 and beyond. She and her colleagues
supported the expansion and investment in the City's Office of Sustainability and the
declaration of a climate emergency by the Council. PASCC supported further investment
in green jobs training such that the City can train more contractors to become experts in
electric installations. She asked the Council to set a date to phase out the use of natural
gas in Palo Alto.  
8. 
Talya Schube, member of PASCC, expressed support for Palo Alto's sustainability and
climate action plan. She stated the most important step was to electrify and eventually
shut off natural gas. In order to electrify on the necessary scale, installations must be
accessible and equitable. She urged the Council to consider working with organizations
like JobTrain and increase the number of contractors trained in electric installations.  
9. 
Phoebe Mota-Judges, member of PASCC, urged the Council to invest more resources, 
staff, and time into the Office of Sustainability to ensure the City has the capacity to meet
its goals. She felt sustainability must be prioritized and coordinated through departments
across the City.  
10. 
Sophia Lee, member of PASCC, wanted to ensure the future is bright for all residents of
Palo Alto regardless of economic status. She believed the SCAP was a huge step toward
progress in regard to sustainability and implementing key action. She stated it was
surprising there were few staff members leading the office of sustainability and asked for
a drastic change in those numbers. She felt more staff, resources, and money needed to
be dedicated solely to sustainability efforts.  
11. Antonia Minion, member of PASCC, felt it was urgent that Palo Alto adopt an official
climate emergency declaration as an important step in making sure the City becomes truly
sustainable. She gave the example of a Public Works Department choosing to use asphalt
that would minimize the urban heat effect and help with flood prevention rather than the
cheapest option.  
12. 
Caitlin Hopkins, member of PASCC, noted that Palo Alto has, through the Green Building
reach codes, committed to heighten the efficiency of local construction. The need for
workers trained to make electric installations is bound to increase, and she asked that the
Council establish a partnership with a job training organization to prepare contractors. 
13. 
Emily Linder, member of PASCC, noted that only a few of the intended 1000 gas-powered
water heaters in Palo Alto homes have been electrified. To sooner reach Palo Alto's goal, 
PASCC urged investment in public awareness campaigns to inform the community of the
importance of electrification.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 08/ 07/2023
14. 
Jeannette Cosby planned to complete an electrification project but noted the approval for
this project was rescinded due to a code change in Palo Alto. The panels conforming to
the new code do not exist and will not be available until 2024. She stated this project was
being held hostage to a code change that no manufacturer can yet meet, and there has
been considerable time and financial resources invested.  
15. 
Aram James ( Zoom) stated he did not want police to have canines or tasers. He did not
want racial profiling by police and did not want police to maintain a military arsenal. He
encouraged members of the community to observe what they see regarding how the
police treat people of color. 
16. Albert Lustre, Carpenter' s Union Local 405, wanted to see labor standards in future
projects in the city of Palo Alto, such as apprenticeship, local hire, healthcare, and a
livable wage. He listed the benefits of these items.  
17. 
Tim Lynch noted the City did a good job of quickly patching up the recent water leak on
Byron. He discussed unlicensed and uncontracted work being done on the weekend and
asked to have code enforcement out during that time. He also mentioned dumping at
3087 Alexis and the property below 2838 Story Hill Lane and wanted to ensure it was
being dealt with correctly.  
18. 
Cedric ( Zoom), in response to Mr. Harper' s comments, described a group in Los Angeles
called Hope Vibes that offers a mobile hygiene service to provide access to showers and
laundry to the homeless population. He felt it would be helpful if local cities would
cooperate to offer such a service. He also noted the difficulty of loss of possessions that
homeless individuals may experience if they are arrested or hospitalized. He suggested
police and code enforcement coordinate with each other and the jails to locate and hold
belongings for people to retrieve.  
CONSENT CALENDAR
5. 
Approval of Minutes from June 12, 2023, and June 19, 2023, Meetings
6. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of an Ordinance Amending Section 9.68.010 (Purpose) and
Section 9.68.040 ( Just Cause Evictions Required) in Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter
9.68, Rental Housing Stabilization, to Reduce the Minimum Time Period Required for
Renters to Qualify for Just Cause Eviction Protections. CEQA status—exempt under
CEQA Guidelines Section 15061(b)(3). 
7. 
Adoption of a Resolution Establishing Fiscal Year 2024 Property Tax Levy for General
Obligation Bonds (Measure N Libraries) 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 08/ 07/2023
8. 
Approval of Contract Number C23187501 With Palo Alto Housing Corp (PAHC) Housing
Services, LLC for a Not-to Exceed Amount of $356,556 to Provide Administration and
Consulting Services for the City’s Below Market Rate Housing Program for a Term of
Two-years through June 2025 and Approve an FY 2024 Budget Amendment in the
Residential Housing In-Lieu Fund. CEQA Action: Agreements are not subject to CEQA. 
9. 
Approve Amendment No. 1 to Contract C21181034 with Rincon Consultants, Inc. for the
Continued Work on the Housing Element Update, and Approval of a FY 2024 Budget
Amendment in the General Fund for the Reappropriation of funds from FY 2023 to
FY2024. Environmental Review: Agreements are not subject to CEQA. 
10. 
Approval and Authorization of the City Manager to Execute a Contract with Allied
Universal
Technology
Services ( AUTS) ( C24187696) in an Amount
Not-to-Exceed
778,275 over 5 years and one month period ending June 30, 2028 to provide Intrusion
Detection System (IDS) monitoring and notification services. CEQA status - not a project. 
11. 
Direction to Evaluate with Caltrain the Viaduct Alternative and Defer Review of the
Trench
Alternative
at
the
Meadow
Drive
and
Charleston
Road
Crossing
as
Recommended
by the Rail Committee; CEQA status – 
categorically
exempt per
Regulation 15262. 
12. 
Approval of FY 2024 Budget Amendment in the Residential Housing In-Lieu Fund for the
Reappropriation of $3.0 million from FY 2023 to FY 2024 for 231 Grant Avenue Loan
Agreement; CEQA – Not a Project
13. 
SECOND READING: Adopt an Ordinance Amending Palo Alto Municipal Code ( PAMC) 
Section 9.10.060 (f) and Adoption of a Resolution to Modify the Administrative Penalty
Schedule
Related to Enforcement
of the City’s Gas-Powered
Leaf Blower
Ban. 
Environmental
Analysis: Not Subject to CEQA Review in Accordance
with CEQA
Guidelines 15061(b)(3). (FIRST READING: June 19, 2023 PASSED 7-0) 
14. 
Approval of a General Services Contract with All City Management Services in an
Amount not to Exceed $ 3,920,865 Over a Five Year Term, for Crossing Guard Services; 
and Approval of a FY 2024 Budget Amendment in the General Fund (2/3 vote required); 
CEQA status - not a project. 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
1. 
Ben Cintz was concerned about Item 6 and felt that for the City to impose a requirement
greater than the State, there should be an established need. He felt this ordinance
imposed a burden on property owners that did not need to exist.  
2. 
Anil Babbar, California Apartment Association, was also concerned with Item 6. He stated
AB 1482 was a well-debated and well-researched piece of legislation that went through a
lot of deliberation at the state level and that it was decided 12 months was sufficient
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 08/ 07/2023
before Just Cause comes into place as it provides the tenant and property owner time to
determine if it is the right situation. He felt imposing a six-month term would conflict with
the minimum lease term requirement.  
3. 
Jennifer L. (Zoom), small housing provider in Palo Alto, was strongly against the strict Just
Cause eviction ordinance, Item 6. Housing providers count on rent to pay for their
mortgage, property tax, insurance, and maintenance, and changing tenants often means
leaving the house vacant for months while painting and doing repairs. She stated there
was no reason to evict tenants unless something was seriously wrong, and it was
beneficial to both tenants and housing providers if tenants can stay for a long time. 
Having stricter policies against housing providers will discourage people from building
ADUs to rent out.  
4. 
Min ( Zoom) also opposed Item 6, which is stricter than what the State already has in
place. She questioned the number of renters in Palo Alto and how many were asked by
landlords to move out in a very short period of time, asking the reason the City wanted to
adopt this restriction. She stated it made her more hesitant about building an ADU.  
5. 
Aram James ( Zoom) was in favor of good tenant protections while being cognizant of
landlords' concerns. He recommended landlords deal with property managers who know
all the current regulations.  
6. 
Peter (Zoom) also spoke about Item 6. He stated people have little incentive to rent their
house if they cannot evict tenants or get it back when they need it for themselves. The
end result would be to defund housing, create a housing shortage, and inflict great harm
to the community.  
7. 
Cedric ( Zoom) spoke in favor of Item 11. He felt the viaduct being placed back under
consideration as an option was a good thing. He stated the underpass was terrible for
bicycle traffic and the trench was too expensive, with permanent impacts to hydrology
and ecology. He hoped the Council would support the viaduct.  
8. 
Mac (Zoom) asked if the City Council had the eviction data for last year. He did not want
Palo Alto to copy other cities' eviction policies that lead to high rents, increased homeless
population, and divided communities. He felt people in Palo Alto deserved better and
urged sticking with the existing eviction clauses in AB 1482.  
MOTION: Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims, to
approve Agenda Item Numbers 5-14. 
Mayor Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 11. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Items Number 6 and Number 12. 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 5, 7-10: 7-0
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 08/ 07/2023
MOTION PASSED ITEM 6, 12: 6-1, Tanaka no
MOTION PASSED ITEM 11: 6-1, Kou no
Council Member Tanaka, regarding Item 6, stated the State had debated the topic many times
and concluded 12 months was sufficient. He felt the 6-month requirement conflicted with the
requirement of a 12-month lease. He noted some landlords were taking properties off the
market due to this restriction, so this would actually hurt tenants, leading to less availability and
higher rents. On Item 12, he was concerned that the benefits Palo Alto was getting were not
proportional to other cities. He felt Palo Alto should be getting more dedicated housing for
teachers, as the City is running a budget deficit.  
Mayor Kou, speaking on Item 11, stated the viaduct had been eliminated by Council for further
consideration, and she did not believe there was enough notification or communication with
residents living near the railroad tracks.  
CITY MANAGER COMMENTS
Ed Shikada, City Manager, listed some upcoming summer fun activities and events. He noted
the Palo Alto Unified School District was back in school this week and referenced a resources
for back-to-school safety and wellness tips. He spoke about the prohibition of gas-powered leaf
blowers, with fines beginning early 2024. He also listed notable upcoming Council items.  
The Council took a 10-minute break, returning at 9:47 P.M. 
ACTION ITEMS
15. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of Resolution Confirming the Weed Abatement Report and
Ordering Abatement Costs to be a Special Assessment on the Properties Specified in the
Report
Chris Rocha, Santa Clara County Consumer and Environmental
Protection Agency Weed
Abatement Inspector, explained that a fee assessment was done in July and August, with all
properties being charged the $ 92 fee and any other contractor fees that were applied. In
January and February, there would be an assessment hearing for properties being added onto
the program for charge fees.  
MOTION: Council Member Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Burt, to adopt a
resolution confirming the report and ordering abatement costs to be a special assessment on
the properties specified in the report. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
