CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 19
Special Meeting
September 5, 2023
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person: 
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka
Present Remotely:  
None
Absent:   
Veenker
Call to Order
Mayor Kou called the meeting to order in honor of National Wildlife Day and Childhood Cancer
Awareness Month. 
Special Orders of the Day
1. 
Interviews for the Architectural Review Board
The 6:00 P.M. interviewee was unable to attend tonight due to an emergency and the interview
postponed to a future date. 
1. Sam Zucker addressed the Council. The Architectural Review Board ( ARB) required at
least three architect members but there were currently five. He has been a corporate
lawyer for over 25 years. His job entailed project management and bringing people
together to find a good solution for everybody. He thought those skills were very useful
for the ARB. He stated he had a longstanding interest in housing and community
development. Before he was a lawyer, he was an urban housing specialist in New York
City and Brooklyn. He published on housing topics. He has been a homeowner in Palo
Alto since 2006. He would love to give back and assist the community. 
Council Member Lauing asked the applicant to elaborate on his interest in planning and
design. Mr. Zucker published an article in The Urban Lawyer on eviction without cause
and setting up an insurance regime for evicting longstanding tenants. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims requested the applicant to explain his approach to
dealing with conflict. Mr. Zucker explained his process was to understand the proposed
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
project and what people wanted, what interests they were trying to accommodate and
flesh out objections or concerns. 
Vice Mayor Stone wanted to know how the applicant’ s skills as an attorney made him a
better fit than those who have education and experience in architecture. Mr. Zucker
pointed out that the ARB had five architects, so there was no absence of architectural
expertise. An outsider’ s perspective can be useful when the community has concerns
arising from architecture and design. He stated he was very good at helping people
reach a solution and an expert in getting people to communicate better. 
Mayor Kou queried what aspects of Fire Station 4’s architecture the applicant liked. Mr. 
Zucker replied that initially the design of the back was boring, so the visual variety of the
back was increased. He believed the whole structure should be visually appealing
because it is on Middlefield Road. 
2. Mousam Adcock is an architect and has worked in the field for close to 20 years. She is a
principal and partner at CAW Architects in Palo Alto. She has practiced in this area for
about 12 years. She worked on many projects at Stanford University, UC Santa Cruz and
UC Berkeley. Her parents, brother and sister were architects. She comes from
Kathmandu, Nepal, where her parents practice. She is very proud of her mother for
being the first female architect of their country. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked the applicant how design, build, construction
and architecture must and can respond to the challenges of global warning. Ms. Adcock
responded it was possible to build Net Zero. She believed we must make as light a touch
as possible on the planet. She helped clients, mechanical and electrical engineers to
make the right choices on site-specific materials because the biggest impact is the
choice of energy and equipment. Many jurisdictions help by banning or reducing the use
of greenhouse gas-emitting energy sources. Architects need to educate themselves and
their clients in making the right choices. Review boards can help architects make a
positive impact by steering the design. 
Vice Mayor Stone queried if the applicant was familiar with the City’s Sustainability and
Climate Action Plan ( S/ CAP) and how the ARB could help the City achieve the 80 x ’30
goal and other sustainability plans. Ms. Adcock clarified that her personal work was not
within the City of Palo Alto’s jurisdiction. She believed architects should have knowledge
about making the right choices but the ARB could steer the design to more sustainable
choices. 
Council Member Lauing asked for the applicant’ s opinion of the adjudication process for
using parkland for the Palo Alto Junior Museum and Zoo (JMZ). Ms. Adcock stated it was
a very close collaboration between many parties. She thought it was lovely but she
pointed out she was slightly biased because it was her office’s project. Her kids visited
when they were little and still enjoy it now as teenagers. She saw it as a benefit
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
question. She felt it was the right location to have a community resource close to
neighborhoods. Children can get hands-on education they cannot obtain in large zoos. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked how Palo Alto was different or similar to other
jurisdictions the applicant worked with. Ms. Adcock noted that the City had very strong
design review similar to other small Bay Area cities. The City differed from many K-12
school projects because DSA issues permits, there was not a strong design review and
every school district had different inputs. The City had a streamlined process of going
through the ARB, then building review and building permits. The City had more
continuity between the various stages versus design review or discussion with a school
district and then obtaining a permit from a different entity. 
3. Alex Lew grew up in Palo Alto. Three generations of his family had been in Palo Alto for
55 years. He lives in Mountain View but owns property in Palo Alto. He has housing
work experience. He studied Palo Alto and Stanford history. He previously worked at
Stanford University Architects and Planning Director’ s Office. He served on the ARB for
4½ terms. He thought the ARB should have a mix of new and old members. He applied
for the ARB because it was a six-month term. 
Council Member Burt asked the applicant to describe his approach to reconciling
competing interests in the community. Mr. Lew responded he tried to be neutral. He
explains the appeals process and that ARB recommendations were based on their
interpretation of zoning but the Planning Director or Council makes the final decision. 
Mayor Kou requested the applicant to elaborate on his thoughts about the Avery
building at Columbia University as an example of human-scale design. Mr. Lew realized
height was an issue of concern in Palo Alto. The eight-story Avery building looked like a
three-story building. A good designer architect can hide floors in a building and use
design dimensions scaled to the human body. Danish urban designer Jan Gehl wrote a
series of books and encouraged designing buildings to a pedestrian walking 3 miles/ hour
on the sidewalk. To interest a pedestrian, windows should be vertical, closely spaced
and varied because at 3 miles/ hour you see something different every 30 seconds. Mr. 
Lew thought that designing cities with that in mind would solve a number of problems. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims was intrigued with the applicant’ s work with micro
studio apartments in Escondido Village at Stanford, affordable housing with Seattle’s
HUD project and Congress for the New Urbanism (CNU). She asked if there was a linkage
between those three as well as his thoughts on how to achieve greater density, human-
scale and habitable microenvironments that are beautiful and sustainable. Mr. Lew
replied the three were tied together. He worked with Dan Solomon, one of CNU’s
founders. HUD’s HOPE VI program applied CNU’s standards. CNU and HUD make
concerted efforts to build projects not available in the private market, such as flats for
seniors or four-bedroom units for large families. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
4. Stephen Sun studied at Carnegie Mellon, SCI-Arc and Harvard Graduate School of
Design. He believed we bake into buildings our values, inspirations and aspirations for
humanity to inherit and learn. He saw it as his civic imperative to help guide
development, ensure built spaces are environmentally restorative and intellectually
stimulating while enhancing the beauty of the city. Good policy promoted the affect, 
effect and impact of good design. 
Mayor Kou asked the applicant how he incorporated the community’ s preferences into
his designs. Mr. Sun responded that design begins by listening to the community via
surveys or direct engagement. One of the projects he was most fond of was designing a
school in Haiti. They spent four months talking to every constituent. As a result, 
everyone had a say and bought into the design process. 
Vice Mayor Stone noted Mr. Sun mentioned on his application that he was interested in
serving on the ARB to balance the threatening influence of AEC/ real estate tech on the
urban fabric. Mr. Sun explained that the older the building, the more it had to offer in
lessons learned from the past. Capitalism influenced the design of homes and buildings, 
which was alarming because it instrumentalized buildings for profit instead of people. 
Tech software speeds up design development but it may not be the best solution for a
community. The longevity of an urban fabric is what drove him to apply. 
Council Member Lauing asked about Mr. Sun’s comment on wanting to facilitate
negotiations between private equity-driven design and human-centered spaces. Mr. Sun
responded that buildings require capital, especially in real estate development. It is
important to deploy capital to make long-lasting healthy spaces in addition to obtaining
a very good return on investment. The lifespan of a building lasts for centuries and we
should all strive to design with that in mind. Mr. Sun’s startup failed, which was a
website that optimized land by entering an address and it calculated how much more
could be built and how many more occupants could fit. They designed multiple homes in
the Bay Area (one in Palo Alto) using that website. Mr. Sun realized there needed to be
more design input and control as opposed to mass development. 
Council Member Lauing pointed out Mr. Sun listed two bachelor degrees in architecture
from different institutions in 2011. Mr. Sun clarified he graduated from one institution. 
He left Carnegie Mellon in 2008 to finish his bachelor’ s at SCI-Arc. 
Mr. Sun was the architect for 916 Colorado. Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked Mr. 
Sun to comment on his experience and any feedback about working with the City. Mr. 
Sun remarked that the City was helpful and conversations were never a waste of time. 
He was most impressed when requesting additional subject matter expertise and the
City quickly brought in two experts for a Microsoft Teams meeting. 
5. John Kunz was a recent emeritus from Stanford’ s Civil Engineering program. He spoke of
the need for having value for the builder to get a return on their investment but also
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/05/2023
value across the community. He was the first in Stanford to teach the use of 3D
modeling. He related an experience his students had with building a 3D model for high-
speed rail in Palo Alto. Mr. Kunz lives in Palo Alto. In 1983, he moved into a single-story
overlay in Triple El when his kids were little. He rides his bike a lot in Palo Alto as well as
all over the region and more broadly in the American West. He advocated for bike
access. He spoke about previously living with his wife in a 12-story building in Santiago. 
Council Member Tanaka asked for the applicant’ s thoughts on the design of El Camino
near the Caltrain station. Mr. Kunz remarked that his dental hygienist lived in Gilroy. He
could go to Gilroy once or twice a year to see his dentist. His grandkids do not live in
Palo Alto. We need less expensive housing available for critical workers to enable them
live here and serve us, including schoolteachers
and those needed for the next
earthquake or fire. He remembered the fire chief saying that 25 years ago all members
of the Fire Department were Palo Alto residents but now the fire chief was the only
resident. 
Mayor Kou thanked Mr. Kunz for being a Block Preparedness
Coordinator
and
Neighborhood Preparedness Coordinator. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
City Manager Ed Shikada stated there were no changes to the agenda. 
Public Comment
1. Liz Gardner wanted help for a family ( grandmother, daughter and baby) evicted from
Mayfield Place who were living in a car on the streets of Palo Alto, working low-wage
jobs and sharing childcare. Ms. Gardner spoke about the difficulty they had trying to
obtain help from LifeMoves since January. Ms. Gardner felt that the Palo Alto Renters
Association’ s was responsible for keeping their membership informed on what the
Association was doing and their plans. 
2. Talya Schube, Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition, is a junior at Gunn High School. She
spoke about California’ s wildfires, Hurricane Hillary and Hurricane Idalia. She felt it was
partly our responsibility to prevent climate events. Staff asked her to submit her
comments to the Council via email because of audio issues. 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements
None
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/05/2023
Consent Calendar
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Items 4, 5 and 6. On Item 4, he was
very hesitant about the Palo Alto History Museum because there were many other uses, it cost
a lot of money and the City would put this project onto its insurance policy. He shared his
screen to show the budget website. General Fund expenditures planned for 2023-2024 were
246 million, resulting in a -$9 million difference. Council previously voted to approve a certain
amount of money and he believed it should not increase. Item 5 was a $96,000 cost increase to
almost $500,000. He expressed his concerns on Item 6. Help to other states can come from the
federal level. The City’s jurisdiction is within the borders of Palo Alto, so he does not believe the
City should force everyone to donate money to another state. It is a personal choice for Palo
Alto residents to decide where to donate their money. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims registered a no vote on Item 4. The tenant work letter
between the City and the Palo Alto History Museum required their general contractor, Vance
Brown, to obtain builder’ s risk policy coverage. According to the terms of the construction
contract between the Museum and Vance Brown, the Museum assumed responsibility for
providing and maintaining the builder’s risk policy. The Museum asked the City to cover them. 
The staff report mentioned it was City policy to ask contractors to be responsible for builder’s
risk insurance. Council Member Lythcott-Haims expressed her concern that the City treated this
contract differently. She hoped there would have been an opportunity to discuss it. 
Item 3 removed from the Agenda. 
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lauing, to approve
Agenda Item Numbers 2, 4-6. 
MOTION PASSED ITEM 2: 6-0-1, Veenker Absent
MOTION PASSED ITEM 4: 4-2-1, Tanaka no, Lythcott- Haims no, Veenker Absent
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 5-6: 5-1-1, Tanaka no, Veenker Absent
2. 
Approval of Minutes from August 14, 2023 Meeting
4. 
Approval of First Amendment to Tenant Work Letter for the Roth Building at 300 Homer
Avenue between the City of Palo Alto and the Palo Alto History Museum. CEQA Status: 
Not a Project. 
5. 
Approval
of Amended
and Restated
Purchase
Order Number
4522000178
with
Interstate Truck Center, to Increase the Purchase Order Amount by $96,767 for a New
Not-to-Exceed Amount of $487,768, Which Includes a 5% Contingency in the Amount of
23,227 for Unforeseen Price Increases, for the Purchase of a 2024 Peterbilt 537 with a
Western Truck Fab Service Body. CEQA status: Exempt under CEQA Guidelines, Section
15061. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/05/2023
6. 
Approval of a Donation of $ 25,000 from the City Council Contingency Account to
Support Maui Wildfire Relief and Recovery
City Manager Comments
City Manager Ed Shikada called attention to upcoming trail and street closures. September 5-8
between 9 a.m. and 3 p.m., Caltrain’ s work will affect vehicle lanes on Alma Street in the area of
Meadow and Charleston. Community members need to plan for traffic impacts. Additional
details are on the City’s website under News Articles. Pearson Arastradero Preserve Creek, 
Arastradero Lake and Acorn Trails were closed until mid-October for needed repairs. In the
Baylands area, the Adobe Creek Loop Trail was closed this week for Valley Water to conduct
work at the Tide Gate. 
There will be a groundbreaking celebration on September 7 at Boulware Park. Other upcoming
events include the Siblings Cities Virtual Author Talk and Town Hall Meetings, Friday Night at
the Art Center on Boom Oaxaca, Coastal Clean Up and the Great Glass Pumpkin Patch at the
Palo Alto Art Center. On Sunday, September
24, there will be a Town Hall for the
neighborhoods of Old Palo Alto, Leland Manor and Southgate. See the City’s website under
News Articles for more information on upcoming events. 
Youth Community Service (YCS) National Day of Service events on September 10 and 11 provide
opportunities for community members to volunteer. The September 11 event at King Plaza
conflicts with the Council meeting but Council Members can attend during their break. 
Community members will soon see public announcements related to the upcoming storm
season. Those who are subject to the National Flood Insurance requirement should contact
their insurance agency to ensure they are receiving a discount related to the City’s participation
in community
outreach
programs. For more information
on storm preparation, go to
cityofpaloalto. org/ PrepareForRain. There will be a multiagency inspection of San Francisquito
Creek and upcoming actions related to Newell Road Bridge. 
In the next few weeks, there will be additional information on the Palo Alto FireMed program. 
This is a subscription program for residents and businesses to receive low-cost ambulance rides. 
Upcoming Council items for September 11: Prescreening of proposed residential development
on El Camino Real, HSRAP funding recommendations on Consent Calendar, next steps and
actions
on the Permanent
Parklet
Program
as well
as Human
Relations
Commission
recommendations
for
race
and
equity
dates
of
significance. September
18: Priority
Development Area, Ellsworth Place development application and Natural Gas winter rate
purchasing strategy. October 2: Update to the Stanford University Medical Center Development
Agreement
as well as building
and zoning requirements
for residential
electrification. 
September 12 Special Meeting: Closed session for performance of City Manager Shikada and
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/05/2023
the City Attorney, followed by Council deliberations on the Portage/ Park Boulevard proposed
development. 
The Council took a 15-minute break.] 
Action Items
7. 
Quasi-Judicial/ Legislative. 3200 Park Boulevard/ 340 Portage [ 22PLN-00287 and 22PLN- 
00288]: Adoption
of a Resolution
Certifying
an
EIR, Adopting
Findings
of Overriding
Considerations, and Adopting a Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program; Approval of
Applicant’ s Request for a Development Agreement, Comprehensive Plan Amendment, Rezoning
to Planned Community Zones, and a Vesting Tentative Map with Exceptions to the Private
Street Width to Allow Redevelopment
of a 14.65-acre site at 200-404 Portage Avenue, 
3040-3250 Park Boulevard, 3201-3225 Ash Street and 278 Lambert. Environmental Assessment: 
A Draft EIR for the 200 Portage Townhome Development Project was Circulated September 16, 
2022 through November 15, 2022. A Revised Final EIR was Made Available for Public Review on
June 2, 2023. The Proposed Development Agreement and Associated Actions is Evaluated as
Alternative 3 in the Draft EIR. For More Information Contact the Project Planner, Claire
Raybould at Claire.Raybould@Cityofpaloalto. org. 
Council Member disclosures: Council Member Burt recently met with representatives of
Sobrato Corp but did not receive information outside of the public record. Council Member
Lythcott-Haims recently met with the applicant’ s representatives and walked through the site
to look at the building. She does not believe she received any information different from what
is contained in Council’ s written materials. Vice Mayor Stone met with the applicant for a site
tour but to the best of his knowledge he did not receive information outside of the public
record. Mayor Kou met with the applicants a long time ago when on the ad hoc committee. 
Council Member Lauing met with the applicant’ s representatives, toured the site and saw what
was included in today’s packet. Council Member Tanaka toured the site a long time ago, before
the ad hoc committee. Council Member Tanaka recently spoke to someone for about 10
minutes but did not talk about anything that was not in the packet. 
Mayor Kou noted that Council was scheduled to meet last week, so Council Member Veenker
planned her vacation for this week and sent her regrets for missing this meeting. Council
Member Veenker will catch up on the presentations and public comments before joining
deliberations next week. 
Senior Planner Claire Raybould delivered a slide presentation. The 3200 Park Boulevard/ 340
Portage project included a development agreement, comprehensive plan amendment, PC
rezoning, vesting tentative map with exceptions and CEQA findings of overriding consideration
for impacts to a historic resource. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
The ad hoc key objectives were housing, particularly affordable housing, park and open space
adjacent Matadero Creek, retention of the cannery building’ s historic features, retail or
community space, pedestrian or bicycle connections, a Transit Demand Management ( TDM) 
plan as well as avoiding lawsuit and uncertainty. 
Key public benefits stipulated in the development agreement included: 2.25 acres of land
adjacent Matadero Creek dedicated to the City for a future public park and one additional acre
of land for an affordable housing project. CEQA analysis assumed 74 market-rate townhome
units. $5 million to the City for affordable housing or park-related uses per the City’s discretion. 
A historic covenant requiring the remaining portion of the cannery building to be maintained in
its rehabilitated and restored state. Improve bicycle and pedestrian connections across the site. 
A connection between Park Boulevard and Portage Avenue proposed as a multiuse path and an
associated public access easement as well as a TDM plan for the commercial uses. 
In exchange for the above benefits, the City would allow the following: Nonconforming
research and development ( R& D) uses to remain within the cannery and office use on Ash. 
Conversion of the Audi building from automotive services to R& D use. Construction of a parking
garage adjacent to the cannery to address loss of surface parking on the parcel dedicated to the
City. A California Register-eligible ( CRHR) resource would be partially demolished. The City
would honor those approvals for 10 years ( normally expires in two or three years). The City
would be precluded from applying most new regulations to the site for 10 years. 
Staff recommendations to Council: ( 1) Adopt the Environmental Impact Report ( EIR) and
resolution in Attachment B making findings of overriding consideration and adopting the
Mitigation
Monitoring
and
Reporting
Plan. ( 2) Adopt
the
resolution
amending
the
comprehensive plan and comprehensive plan Land Use Map. ( 3) Adopt the five Planned
Community ( PC) ordinances for each of the resulting parcels, amending the zone districts across
the project site. (4) Adopt the Record of Land Use Action, including architectural review findings
for approval of the development plan, findings for a vesting tentative map with exceptions and
conditions of approval of the proposed project. ( 5) Adopt the ordinance approving the
development agreement. 
City Attorney Molly Stump spoke about what would happen if the City and property owner did
not reach agreement on development of this site. There was another application on file for 91
townhomes, so that application would likely move forward because Council authorized the City
to enter into an agreement with the developer. The application raised an issue of interpretation
of local law. The City and property owner have different interpretations of the zoning provision
about nonconforming uses on this site. If that disagreement was not resolved, the Superior
Court had authority to make a definitive ruling. The 91-townhome project potentially could
raise a question that had not been definitively litigated and decided in our courts concerning
the interaction of the SB 330 Housing Accountability Act and California Environmental Quality
Act (CEQA) for a historic resource. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
Architectural Review Board Chair Peter Baltay addressed Council. The ARB reviewed this project
over the past nine months, twice in study sessions and twice in formal hearings. The ARB
persuaded the applicant to make several important design improvements. In June, the ARB
unanimously recommended that the Planning Director approve the project, subject to a few
important conditions. Critical design modifications included the following: Greater variation of
townhouse facades, especially as seen from Park Boulevard, through greater variation of roof
heights. Use softer and warmer materials and colors. Lower the freestanding parking garage
structure behind the existing cannery building to minimize neighborhood impact and preserve
visual importance of the cannery building. Reduction of new two-story elements at the front of
the cannery building to better preserve the visual dominance of the existing cannery building. 
The proposed new windows on the cannery building should have greater historical accuracy. 
Two important design modifications remained outstanding. The ARB urged City Council to
uphold the following conditions of approval: Additional modifications of a portion of the end
facade of Building # 1, which remained too angular and did not present well when seen from
Park Boulevard or Olive Avenue. The ARB unanimously decided the central paseo should be at
least 28 feet wide, which was reasonably achievable without undue burden on the applicant
and critically important for future residents to enjoy and benefit from the outdoor spaces
created by the paseo.  
The ARB unanimously found the project was significantly lacking in two important aspects. The
use of 340 Portage was historically significant and the cannery building should be preserved so
the public can experience the interior of the building. At least the area underneath the monitor
roof portions of the building should be publicly accessible and usable space such that the
entirety of the length of the monitor roof was visible. The ARB believed it was important to
understand that the application before Council does not let the public go inside the building. 
You can go into one small storefront that has a flat roof carved out from this space with a small
opening in it to see what was there. The ARB thought that was inappropriate as a design
treatment and for the nature of this building. There were other ways to develop this site while
retaining the building’ s use. Secondly, the portion of the site designated for townhomes should
be higher density residential
housing. The ARB had substantial
discomfort with these
shortcomings and felt it was important for Council to consider how much better the project
could be if there was a large public open space to help preserve an important part of our
history in the old cannery building as well as a greater variety of housing types and densities on
this site. 
Planning and Transportation Commissioner Bart Hechtman stated the PTC held three meetings
between November and last month. At their last meeting, they were largely supportive of
staff’s recommendation with one notable exception. Staff recommended base zoning be a
service commercial designation. The PTC voted unanimously ( with one member absent) to
recommend mixed-use designation rather than service commercial. PTC’s recommendation to
staff was to make sure the designation was consistently changed to mixed use in all documents
before Council tonight, including the comp plan, development agreement and rezoning. The
PTC recommended a change to the mixed-used text to allow up to 100% of available FAR to be
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
used for residential to encourage housing, multifamily housing in particular, in mixed-use
developments. 
Senior Planner Raybould spoke on behalf of the Historic Resources Board ( HRB) as they were
unable to attend. The HRB held a study session on January 12, 2023. The HRB’s motion advised
Council to include the following as conditions of approval: HABS-like ( Historic American
Buildings Survey) documentation augmented by the best current technology available for the
entire cannery structure and establish an appropriate repository for information. Conduct a
postconstruction
analysis of the remaining monitor roof building section to evaluate for
inclusion and nomination to the National Register of Historic Places, local listing, California
Landmark status and California Point of Historical Interest status. The applicant should look at
additions to and separations from the monitor roof section of the building to enable eligibility
for the National Register of Historic Places. 
The EIR evaluated the project and determined it would not continue to be eligible for the
California Register or the National Register. Senior Planner Raybould stated there is generally
more latitude on the local register but she did not want to give any false expectations. The local
registry does not have many restrictions. Code 16.49 protects resources in the downtown area
from demolition and requires evaluation by the HRB but recommendations were voluntary. A
60-day evaluation was required but it would not stop demolition. It was protected under CEQA
as a California Register-eligible resource but did not provide additional protections for this
resource. 
If this property were sold in the future, the purchaser could not demolish it because the
development agreement included a historical maintenance deed restriction on this site to
protect what remained of the resource unless the City agreed to remove the deed restriction. 
Assistant City Attorney Yang confirmed that while the deed restriction was in place and the City
had not agreed to its removal, the cannery needed to be maintained in perpetuity in the
rehabilitated state it would be in following this project. 
A proposed two-way bicycle/ ped path would connect Park Boulevard to Ash Street by spanning
part of a City parcel, a small portion of the Ash parcel, the cannery and the townhome parcel. 
The path would mostly be 12 feet wide but narrowed to 10 feet wide next to the Ash building. 
Some improvements on Park Boulevard, Portage and Ash would provide safe connections as
per the Palo Alto Bicycle Advisory Committee’ s feedback. With the TDM plan, there would be a
15% reduction in vehicle trips for R& D uses through passes and other plan elements. 
Vice Mayor Stone asked if the HRB opined whether Council should approve the project. Senior
Planner Raybould replied that the HRB did not specifically recommend approval or denial of the
project. 
Senior Planner Raybould stated it was the City’s position that any reuse of this property would
require substantial modifications to the site to comply with life safety requirements. It was an
awkward building for the purposes of a housing project. It was very wide. To create housing
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
units that allowed air and light to come in, staff thought the building needed light wells because
of its depth. The staff report elaborated on this subject in more detail. 
Vice Mayor Stone asked if the cannery building would maintain its eligibility status on any of the
historical registries at the local, state or federal level if it were reused for housing or retail. 
Assistant City Attorney Yang responded there may be commercial
uses but the City’s
consultants would need to review a set of plans to make that determination. Any residential
use would require such a great amount of change that it would not retain its eligibility. City
Attorney Molly Stump added that the cannery would not comply with the Secretary of Interior’s
Standards. Senior Planner Raybould remarked there were character-defining features inside
and exterior to the cannery. At next week’s meeting, the historic consultant can comment on
this. 
Mayor Kou queried if passes for Caltrain and VTA were part of the TDM. Planning Director Lait
replied that the lease agreement required future tenant to provide free transit passes to all
R& D employees per Condition 50 of the Record of Land Use Action and the TDM. 
For next week’s meeting, Mayor Kou requested a Trip Generation Table using Palo Alto data
instead of national data as well as for staff to address how the City would enforce the TDM. 
Matthew Davis with ARG ( Architectural Resources Group), historic architecture consultant, 
stated the focus was on honoring and maintaining the historic character of the cannery building
through repairing where feasible and replacing in kind where necessary. 
Jennifer Easton, art consultant, spoke of Artist Kyungmi Shin. Ms. Shin had an extensive
background in public art and her work was well known for its integration of historic elements in
contemporary and cultural settings. Ms. Shin met with community members, the Public Art
Commission and Thomas Foon Chew’s family to develop her historical background on the
project. 
Sobrato Vice President of Development Robert Tersini and KTGY Associate Principal David
Burton delivered slide presentations. 
Ms. Shin had not finalized her design. Ms. Shin was scheduled for the Palo Alto Public Art
Commission on September 21. Ms. Easton stated they selected this artist because her past
work delved into the history of the site and the community in which the artwork was placed. 
Mayor Kou was looking for reassurance that the art would stick with historical facts on Mr. 
Thomas Foon Chew the person and his great work as well as the different events that occurred
at this site. 
In reply to Mayor Kou’s query if automobiles would be to travel from Portage to Park, Senior
Planner Raybould responded yes and passage of emergency vehicles such as firetrucks was
calculated. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
Council Member Lauing asked the applicant why they decided not to accept the ARB’S
recommendations on opening up more space for the public to come in and view the broader
rooflines. Sobrato Vice President Tersini replied it was due to the amount of retail needed to
make this space viable. Mr. Sakalowski from Archtic responded they would look at making the
skylights larger but there was a size limit for the glass because the structure had to hold up the
weight of the glass within the ceiling. 
Council Member Lauing envisioned the cannery site could be similar to the Minnesota Project in
South San Francisco that had beautiful old architecture, many galleries and a lot of public space. 
Sobrato Vice President Tersini stated the intent was to have only R& D tenants. They were trying
to determine the best retail use, maybe a local coffee shop but an art gallery or anything else
might struggle because the location was tucked away. 
Vice Mayor Stone asked what portion of the current building was the original cannery building
and if that portion would be preserved. Senior Planner Raybould replied that the portions
closer to Park were the newest additions but it was not clear when the additions were done or
what parts of the cannery were original; however, all of it was developed during the period of
significance, so all of it was relevant to the historic integrity of this site. 
Public Comment: 
1. 
Rebecca Sanders spoke on behalf of Mary Sylvester, Scott Van Duyne, Jeff Levinsky, 
Andrea Temkin, Angela Dellaporta and Joyce McClure. Ms. Sanders lives near the cannery site. 
She serves as moderator for the Ventura Neighborhood Association and Co-Chair of Palo Alto
Neighborhoods ( PAN). The cannery building and office building on Ash represented a unique
piece of the history of California, Palo Alto and Chinese Americans. Thomas Foon Chew built the
third largest cannery operation in the world, employed and housed hundreds of workers of
multiple nationalities. 25,000 people attended his funeral. Much of what he built was now gone
except the cannery and office building on Ash. She would like to have housing and preserve the
cannery. The EIR found that demolishing a portion of the cannery would end its historic
significance. It was not clear where the City would obtain funds to build affordable housing. 
Sobrato’ s proposal of market-rate townhomes was not a guarantee they would be built. 
Sobrato won approval to redevelop Mike’s Bikes but sold the property without going forward
with the development. 
Ms. Sanders preferred a proposal that would provide at least the same amount of housing and
preserve the entire cannery. If the part of the cannery that was to be demolished was
converted into a garage to provide parking for the office employees, a new two-story garage
north of the cannery would no longer be needed and townhomes could be built where the
garage was proposed. This would result in about the same number of housing units but the
cannery would remain 100% intact. It was a better environmental option and provided cost
savings because it did not require tearing down a portion of one building and constructing a
new garage. There was no evidence in the EIR to support the claim that saving the cannery
would result in a drastic reduction in townhomes. The staff report stated garage conversion
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
would prevent the building from qualifying as a historic structure due to new ventilation
openings. Ms. Sanders suggested ventilation through the roof rather than the walls. She
wanted clarification if interior ramps, floor leveling and constructural modifications would
affect the building’ s historic status. 
Adaptive reuse is increasingly popular as cities have a surplus of office space and not enough
housing. The EIR looked at the option of putting housing into the cannery building but instead
of trying to fit a comparable number of units, it concluded 281 units would not fit. Ms. Sanders
requested more evidence, graphs and numbers to be convinced that housing in the cannery
building was not a viable option. Individual units in residential buildings in urban downtown
areas often lack exterior windows or doors. It was possible to put housing into the cannery
without modifying the exterior walls by using common corridors to a few outer doorways as
well as bringing in sunlight and air with interior courtyards and light shafts. Ms. Sanders
suggested consulting an independent architect experienced in adaptive reuse. 
A third option suggested by the Planning Commission was to use underground parking for
offices and/ or housing. The current plan does not include underground parking. The WeWork
building on Park, Wilton Court and most new proposals for buildings in Ventura have
underground
parking. The Fry site’s acres of open
space
could
easily
accommodate
underground
parking. Other historic structures
in Palo Alto have parking underneath. 
Considering land values in Palo Alto, underground parking allows you to get more value from
the site. 
Ms. Sanders requested Council Members to ask for better options. To preserve a landmark with
rich and important history was worth the effort. 
2. 
Terry Holzemer spoke on behalf of Patricia Hernandez, Paul Machado, Suzanne Keehn, 
Ann Balin and Jim Poppy. He commented on the history of the cannery, Thomas Foon Chew and
the Valley of Heart’s Delight. He showed a video about Silicon Valley Eats and Thomas Foon
Chew. Demolition would remove distinctive materials, including the canning platforms, cooling
porches and several other character-defining features such as the form, massing and varied
roofs that cannot be replaced or duplicated. Mr. Holzemer cited EIR Page 4.2-12. The proposed
demolition would significantly diminish those characteristics of the historic resource that
convey its historical significance and justify its eligibility for listing in the California Register of
Historic Resources. The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Properties required you to retain materials from the period of significance. Mr. Holzemer urged
Council to review Pages 4 and 10 of the May 25 staff report as well as Attachment C of the May
25 HRB report, specifically Page 91. 
3. 
Liz Gardner asked Council to zone all 14 acres as residential and save the whole
property. She believed the monitor roofs were used to release poisonous gasses on the canning
line and not an architectural element. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
4. 
Andrew Chang promoted the Chinese culture for over 40 years. He was a teacher and
principal at a Chinese language school. He reminded Council Members they were in a unique
position because their decision would make a substantial difference, so they should vote on
their conscience. 
5. 
Mary Ng is a representative of SaveCantonese. org. She offered to volunteer to help tell
the story of Thomas Foon Chew. She was in support of housing and anything for the community
that helped get this story out. 
6. 
Bob Moss commented that the cannery was the first major industrial building in Palo
Alto. For almost 20 years, it was the major employer in Palo Alto with as many as 3000 workers. 
He felt that creating a few dozen additional apartments and tearing down a unique building was
a blunder because we should be preserving our history instead of destroying it. He preferred
townhouses be built elsewhere in the city. He asked Council to deny the request to demolish
84,000 square feet of the building. Furthermore, the building should be retained and
recognized as a unique historical monument. He was on the Board of Cable Co-Op when their
offices and studios were in the building. In his more than 10 years in the building, he noted it
was very functional, well developed and well designed. Mr. Moss suggested retaining the
structure for use as a place where people can congregate or a community center. 
7. 
Fan Jiao had been a Bay Area resident for more than 30 years. He is a former Palo Alto
resident and currently lived in San Jose. He was interested in housing topics because he
believed it was the most difficult issue facing the Bay Area. Two weeks ago, he attended San
Jose Mayor Matt Mahan’s meeting. San Jose’s approach was unique because they depend on
quick-build communities that cost $ 100,000 each unit, which Mr. Jiao opined was the most
efficient way to solve the housing problem. 
8. 
Xi Zhang has been a Palo Alto resident since 2015. She believed any place with historical
significance needed to be protected. Houses could be built anywhere but this location should
be preserved to pass on the memories and stories to future generations. 
9. 
Karen Holman spoke on behalf of Andie Reed, Hank Sousa, Winter Dellenbach, and Carol
Kiparsky. They had several concerns about the project. It destroyed a major and rare historical
resource important to our cultural, business, Silicon Valley and entrepreneurial legacies and
that of the Valley of the Heart’s Delight. It was largely inconsistent with NVCAP goals due to the
increase in office and small community benefits. It offered little housing, 74 market-rate
townhomes ( if built) and affordable housing in an unknown timeframe with unidentified
funding for $60 to $80 million. The FEIR does not respond to critical questions raised; however, 
the Council was required to certify the EIR and make a statement for overriding considerations. 
Negotiations on economic considerations, site planning and the development agreement were
behind closed doors without the benefit of advice from the public, boards and commissions. A
10-year development agreement leaves open the future of this site and uncertainty for the
neighboring community. This building was a monument to the accomplishments of Thomas
Foon Chew, whose story was included in the book Bay Area Visionaries. At NVCAP meetings, 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
numerous times the City was requested to conduct a feasibility study for reuse of the building, 
which had not occurred to her knowledge. Plaques were not mitigations. Once a historic and
cultural resource was gone, it was gone forever. We have known for three years that this
building was eligible for the California Register. If listed, it was eligible to use State Historic
Building Code’s alternatives for safety, energy and health concerns. 
At the HRB meeting, Ms. Holman heard the applicant state they would not restore and repair
existing materials, instead they would replace in kind. These parcels would be zoned PC. The
development agreement was for 10 years. What parameters would be in place for PC Districts
in the future? We displace our culture, legacies and important history as a community when we
erase the significant past that exists on this site. Council has an opportunity to take a stand by
standing for a man who cannot stand for himself but who left a legacy in your hands. It would
be not only a shame but shameful to destroy the physical evidence of his life and works. Council
can use this opportunity to provide transparency and a future that delivers housing. This is
Council’ s opportunity to assure the public they are getting a fair deal, aligning largely with the
NVCAP. 
10. 
Dennis Backland was the City’s Historic Preservation Planner from 2000 to 2014, 
working out of the Planning Department. He read the historic documents. The Page & Turnbull
report established the historic importance of this property and noted some of its character-
defining features. In the final EIR, the section by Rincon Consultants was very important
because it gave details on how this cannery building should be treated under the Secretary
Standards. Mr. Backland would like the fenestration of the original portion of the building, the
1918 section with the monitor roofs, restored very close to the way it was originally built, 
according to the 1940 photo, per the Standards. Mr. Backland would like a plaque in front of
the 1918 section to detail the Chinese heritage of the cannery building, preferably a plaque
placed on a boulder because it attracted more attention and readers as was done with the
Hewlett Packard garage. 
11. 
Carmen Tam read a letter on behalf of John Kinyon, a fifth generation Palo Alto. Four
years ago, the City received a historic resources evaluation that determined the old Bayside
Cannery building met the criteria to be on the California Register of Historical Resources. The
building overall is intact, with nearly all of its original features and structure present. The
cannery’ s historic importance to the Chinese American community is undeniable. This beautiful
early 20th century industrial building could be transformed into offices and a cultural center for
the community. This project could be called Mayfield Cannery, Palo Alto Cannery or simply
Cannery. It could include loft live/ workspace for artists and craftsmen, numerous art galleries, 
museum, restaurant, cafe, brewery, convention room or classroom. It could be a beautiful place
for the community to enjoy outdoor festivals with music and vendors. The proximity to the
railroad station would draw tourists from San Francisco and San Jose. 
12. 
Barbara Hing’s family has been residents since the late 1800s. Ms. Hing was in support
of preserving the Thomas Foon Chew cannery. She asked Council to reconsider the cannery as a
monument to the struggles and triumphs of Palo Alto’s early Asian American pioneers. She
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
urged Council to vote in favor of preserving the cannery and adding it to California Registry of
Historical Buildings. 
13. 
Ray Hing read a letter from Connie Young Yu, which in part said the Bayside Cannery
building must not be demolished and its significant legacy erased from Palo Alto. Thomas Foon
Chew was a great industrialist and humanitarian of his time whose struggles and achievement
during the Chinese Exclusion Act must be brought forth. Ms. Yu is a Chinese American historian, 
third-generation Californian and author of Chinatown, San Jose, USA. Ms. Yu felt that the
building’ s physical evidence was critical to learning the truth about the past. Once it was
destroyed, it was gone forever. Council was urged to preserve Bayside Cannery on Portage
Road. It was an opportunity to discover the past. Mr. Hing was 100% in agreement with Ms. Yu
and urged Council to consider this item seriously. 
14. 
Monica Yeung Arima lives in Professorville and rebuilt her historic home 25 years ago. 
She volunteers for the Chinese community, Stanford History Department, Chinese Railroad
History Project, Greene Library, Stanford’ s FSI Space Program for multiethnic education
curriculum for K-12 and the Cal Library. The Bayside Cannery was a way to remember Thomas
Foon Chew and the early Asian American pioneers in Palo Alto and Mayfield. Ms. Arima felt it
was important to preserve history so it was not forgotten. A historic building in its original stage
is a rare finding. This was an opportunity to preserve this site for future generations. All three
consulting firms agreed that 40% demolition and front-facing facade changes would destroy the
historic element of the building and it would no longer qualify to be on the California Register. 
Ms. Arima strongly recommended Council to not to destroy the historic building but to preserve
it. 
15. 
Christie Li is a former Palo Alto resident and PAUSD graduate. She stated that the
Bayside Cannery must be preserved for future generations and included on the City’s Historic
Inventory List. While a student at Paly, she interned at the Palo Alto Historical Association
PAHA) in 2015 to catalog and preserve Chinese and Japanese American History in Palo Alto. 
She thanked the City for funding that project. She walked through the cannery, which then was
home to Fry’s Electronics. She remembered seeing the high ceilings and windows, the beams
and planks and feeling the physical building reflect Palo Alto’s history as not only a landing
ground for Asian Americans but also a reminder of our City’s industrial and agricultural past. 
She credited her experience in the cannery to have led her to her current career as an urban
planner. It is important to build market rate and affordable housing. There were ways to ensure
the cannery’ s interior remained accessible for all Palo Altans, preserving the full integrity of the
historical facade while advocating for affordable housing and mixed-use development. 
16. 
Brenda Hee Wong is a Chinese Historical and Cultural Project (CHCP) Board Member and
Chair of the Student Docent Cultural Ambassador Program. She spoke tonight to advocate for
the youth of the community. In CHCP’ s 35-year history, they have worked diligently to preserve, 
educate and promote Chinese and Chinese American history and culture through outreach
activities that allow interaction with original or replicated artifacts of historical or cultural
significance. People appreciate, understand and learn more when an object is in front of them. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
Youth’s attention and awareness were lost when not able see or hear from a direct source. 
Walking into the Bayside Cannery, seeing and hearing stories about hardship, persistence and
success would stimulate youth to become more sensitive to a time when discrimination and
racism occurred. With utilization of one’s intellect and creativity, struggles can bring success
and a better life. 
17. 
Tom Chew is the grandson of Thomas Foon Chew, the founder of Bayside Cannery. 
There were permits to construct townhouses. Demolishing 40% of his grandfather’ s cannery
site would render it ineligible for historic registration. Mr. Chew requested artifacts from the
building (timber, bricks, etc.) be preserved for inclusion in the future Palo Alto History Museum
on Homer Avenue for remembrance of his grandfather’ s Bayside Cannery. 
18. 
Yugen Lockhart has been a resident on Olive Avenue for 45 years. Growing up, he
viewed this building as a large, defunct eyesore. He respected and appreciated what Sobrato
offered to preserve. More research could determine if the 40% portion proposed for demolition
was Babbitt Bearings. He opined it was a reasonable compromise to save the building and put
in townhomes. Palo Alto Square had a requirement to keep the movie theater but did a bad
management job and chose to close it. Mr. Lockhart thought it would be nice to get the movie
theater back. 
19. 
Wanda Ching stated that the historic Bayside Cannery building must not be demolished. 
Thomas Foon Chew was a first-generation immigrant who was smart, worked hard, saved
money and opened factories in Alviso, Palo Alto and other Bay Area cities. Chew was one of the
largest employers in Santa Clara Valley. Chew had the third largest cannery operation in the
world, behind Del Monte and Libby. He was a critical player in California’ s agriculture and
canning industries and revolutionized asparagus canning technology. Acknowledgement of
Chinese Americans for their contributions and accomplishments in agriculture, fishing, canning
and technology industries and building the railroads should be recognized as intertwined in the
development of California and America. Chew died of pneumonia at the age of 41. As a
testament to the respect he received and his kindness, more than 25,000 people attended his
funeral in San Francisco Chinatown. Thomas Foon Chew was a rags-to-riches story that
happened here in Palo Alto. We cannot allow this significant legacy to be erased. 
20. 
Matt Bryant and his family live in the Sunnyside tract in Mayfield. They walk their dog
around the cannery almost daily. Mr. Bryant opined it would be great if the City could tie
together more greenspace, more parks. His area was landlocked between El Camino and the
train tracks. He suggested having well-marked pedestrian and bike access from this new
community to the train station as well as greater access on El Camino for bicycling and alternate
routes of transportation for kids to get to school. He thought the focus should be on how to live
better in our community if we were going to bring higher density housing into our area. 
Mayor Kou invited the applicant to offer responses to public comment but they declined. 
Mayor Kou requested staff to send a link to Council Members for the Turnbull Historic Resource
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 19
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 09/ 05/2023
Evaluation of 340 Portage Avenue. Senior Planner Raybould pointed out there was a link in the
staff report but she could send the link to Council Members. 
Council decided to release the Keyser Marston financial analysis report to the public. Public
comment will reopen at next week’s meeting but only for comments narrowly limited to the
financial analysis report. 
MOTION: Mayor Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims, to direct staff to
release the financial analysis to the public. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Veenker Absent
A community member filed an application to the HRB for local designation of the cannery
building. Planning Director Lait thought staff was preparing reports to be sent on the 18th. The
HRB had two or three meetings on this matter. Assistant City Attorney Yang remarked that the
application was to add the building to our local register and it was their belief that could be
done even if this project was approved. If this building was on our local register, our historic
preservation code would not affect consideration of this project. HRB recommendations on
locally listed resources outside of the downtown area were voluntary for the property owner. 
City Manager Shikada confirmed this item was scheduled for Council deliberation and action at
8 p.m. on Tuesday, September 12. 
Adjournment: The meeting adjourned at 10:01 P.M. 
