CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 22
Special Meeting
June 12, 2023
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely:  
Absent:  
CALL TO ORDER
Mayor Kou called the meeting to order in honor of Immigrant Heritage Month.  Roll was taken. 
CLOSED SESSION
1. 
CONFERENCE
WITH
LABOR
NEGOTIATORS
City
Designated
Representatives: 
City
Manager and his Designees Pursuant to Merit System Rules and Regulations ( Ed
Shikada, Kiely Nose, Sandra Blanch, Tori Anthony, Molly Stump, and Jennifer Fine) 
Employee Organization: Service Employees International
Union, ( SEIU) Local 521, 
Utilities Management and Professional Association of Palo Alto ( UMPAPA), Palo Alto
Peace Officers’ Association ( PAPOA), Palo Alto Police Management Association ( PMA), 
International Association of Fire Fighters ( IAFF) local 1319, Palo Alto Fire Chiefs’ 
Association ( FCA); Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6 (a)  Item removed from
Agenda
REMOVED FROM AGENDA
SPECIAL ORDERS OF THE DAY
2. 
Proclamation honoring AACI (Asian Americans for Community Involvement) 
Mayor Kou read the proclamation honoring Asian Americans for Community Involvement.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
AACI President/ CEO Sarita Kohli thanked the Council for this honor, which is a testament to the
vision and dedication of the founders of AACI.  They were visionary individuals who thought
into the future about how to support the communities.  When the organization started, Santa
Clara County was about 4% Asian and now it is close to 40%.  AACI has expanded beyond just
serving the Asian community and serves all people regardless of ability to pay and immigration.  
The staff speaks 40 different languages and serves close to 21,000 people a year with various
services.  It is an integrated health and wellness organization due to the vision of the founders.   
PUBLIC COMMENT
1. 
Jeffrey Shore spoke regarding the plan to replace the Pope Chaucer Bridge.  He noted the
planned downstream improvements were inadequate to contain the increased flows, and
some neighborhoods downstream of the new Pope Chaucer Bridge would flood if there
were another 1998-like storm.  This will require raising the height and length of
downstream top-of-bank structures, leading to more cost and delay.  He asked leaders not
to transfer flood risk to downstream residents. 
2. 
Alka Mithal spoke regarding Senate Bill SB 403, regarding caste discrimination.  While she
herself is against caste discrimination, she was worried about this bill as it specifically
targets and causes negative perception of Hindu Americans.  
She believed it was
unconstitutional.   
3. 
Sandeep
Dedage, representing
APNADB, an organization
of Dalits and Bahujans, 
marginalized people of South Asia, strongly opposed SB 403 as discriminatory and
fundamentally unfair.  He stated this was not a bill of the Dalit caste but one of
weaponizing antidiscrimination
to butcher the cultural existence of minorities.  
He
requested Palo Alto pass a resolution against 403.  He stated that people of his
background are not willing to come forward in light of death threats, that this bill creates
more hate and ignores the colonial trauma of these groups, and that there was no input
from these communities when creating this bill.   
4. 
Shrish Agrawal also had concerns about SB 403 and believed it was a misguided attempt
to fix a problem that it is unclear even exists.  He questioned the methodology of the
study and neutrality of the organization involved.  He rejected the ideology that caste is
an integral part of Hinduism and urged the Council to condemn that idea and this bill.   
5. 
Mohit Thawani also opposed SB 403 as a discriminatory bill that targets Indian Americans
unfairly.  He stated the bill is unnecessary because most Indian Americans do not identify
with a caste and caste discrimination is already covered under existing laws.  In addition, it
is not neutral and targets a minority community.   
6. 
Sandeep Bhat requested the Council file a motion to oppose SB 403.  He related that in his
20 years in the U.S., he has never experienced or witnessed caste-related issues and that
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
this bill would create an issue where none exists.  He added that the bill was authored by
a for-profit organization and based on flawed survey and data and that the California Civil
Rights Department engaged in dubious methods while investigating this issue.  He urged
the Council to do their own research and form their own opinions on the matter.   
7. 
Anil Rachakonda stated most Indian Americans do not identify by caste.  He felt the bill set
people apart and created more discrimination rather than bringing them together.  He
stated the wording of the bill was vague and questioned who will define caste.  He stated
the senator involved in the bill has refused to engage in discussion regarding alternative
language that would make the bill neutral.  He urged the Council to oppose this bill. 
8. 
Aram James (Zoom) spoke in support of SB 403.  He quoted the existing Unruh Civil Rights
Act and stated that this bill would add caste as something that people could not be
discriminated
for.  He felt there was a long history of caste discrimination
and
recommended several books on the subject.   
9. 
Matt Schlegel ( Zoom) spoke about the recent passing of the SCAP.  He stated there is a
dire climate crisis and a need to stop burning fossil fuels and emitting CO2 into the
atmosphere.  He encouraged the SCAP Ad Hoc Committee to reconvene and do a deep
dive on the root causes of the low installation rate of the heat pump water heaters in the
pilot program.  Nearly halfway through the year, only 12 out of 1000 new heat pump
water heaters have been installed.   
10. Muni Madhdhipatla ( Zoom) spoke against SB 403 and requested Palo Alto City Council to
pass a resolution against this bill as it unfairly targets and discriminates against the Indian
American community.  He stated that labeling this community as a caste-practicing
community that discriminates against others is in itself discriminating.  He noted that the
District Attorney stated there is not a single case under his jurisdiction with anything to do
with caste.  He felt the bill should be rejected and the lawmakers advancing such bills
should be reprimanded.   
11. Mohan ( Zoom) stated the Indian community is a vibrant, law-abiding community.  He
stated Senate Bill 403 calls this community bigots, bullies, rapists, human traffickers, even
murderers to justify an assault on the rights of equal protection under law.  He stated
there is no bill in the U.S. that targets only a particular community and asks them to stop
discriminating.  He stated the concept of caste did not exist in conversations until this bill
was proposed and felt the bill was designed to break the community rather than pull it
together.   
12. Dilip Amin ( Zoom) stated the bill was confusing in that it talks about Hindus without
explicitly spelling that out.  He cited several lawyers' publications against this bill, noting
that there is concern about whether the intent of the bill may be to target and condemn
particular
communities
with whom the word caste is deeply and stereotypically
associated.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
13. 
Ravi [ inaudible] ( Zoom) explained that Hinduism, at its core, views the world as one single
family and some of the points raised by Mr. James do not apply to today's Western Hindu
living.  He encouraged reading books recommended by the Hindu community and then
forming an opinion on whether to support the bill.   
COUNCIL MEMBER QUESTIONS, COMMENTS AND ANNOUNCEMENTS
Council Member Lythcott-Haims spoke about State Assembly Constitutional Amendment 5
ACA 5), a proposed constitutional amendment to remove the anti-gay marriage provision
known as Proposition 8 from the California Constitution.  
It passed in 2008 and was
subsequently nullified by the courts but remains in the Constitution.  This is an important way
to declare that gay marriage is unequivocally legal in California.  She hoped the Council would
support this.   
Mayor Kou stated she believed Staff was recommending support on ACA 5 and she agreed with
not tolerating discrimination.  However, removing the language erases it from the record, and
she hoped that does not happen and that education is continued.   
STUDY SESSION
3. 
Bi-Annual Discussion with the Independent Police Auditor
City Manager Ed Shikada noted there are twice-a-year opportunities to meet with the
Independent Police Auditors.   
Independent Police Auditor Michael Gennaco gave an overview of OIR Group's process and how
complaints are investigated and resolved.   
Independent Police Auditor Stephen Connolly further described that the review process both
investigates the incidents and looks for possible adjustments based on the specifics of the cases
in order to improve the department' s operational systems going forward.  For the latest cycle, 
there were three investigations into alleged misconduct, one use of force that met the
established criteria, and three pointed firearm incidents, a new category being tracked.  In each
instance, OIR concurred with the outcome the department reached.  Even when a complaint is
unfounded, there are often still areas for follow-up and things that could be done better, and
the department has been committed to documenting any interventions that take place.  In all
three-pointed firearms instances, the officer's use of that technique was found to be
appropriately warranted by the circumstances.  The IPA recommendations were based on
issues from actual cases and intended to enhance future effectiveness of officer performance
and the PAPD review process.  The pointed firearm process was new to both the department
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
and OIR, and refinements are being worked on on both ends to enhance the capture and
review process.   
Auditor Gennaco discussed that during the investigation of one incident, it was discovered that
the officers involved may have used their personal cell phones to communicate with regard to
drafts of police reports, etc.  The officers, through their attorney, declined to provide their cell
phone information to the investigation.  That information could potentially have been critical to
the full assessment of the allegation, and the investigator did not have access to it.  A
recommendation was made that in future situations in which there is information relating to
PAPD business on a personal cell phone, the investigator should demand that information
pursuant to the ability to do so.  It was also recommended that personal cell phones should be
reserved for personal business and not used for Palo Alto business when possible.   
Auditor Connolly reviewed the hiring and recruiting audit.  This topic was selected by the
Council for additional inquiry to test how the process is working and make recommendations
with regard to best practices.  In terms of the key issues, diversity was a priority and
competition among agencies was a challenge.  The report discussed the mechanics of the
process, the internal recruiting team, and the state requirements.  The auditors were impressed
with the energy and dedication of the team members, who understand the challenges and
public expectations.  It was found the approach was engaged; they were flexible and taking
initiative, while maintaining high standards in a time when there are less applicants than in the
past.  Palo Alto recognizes the value of a diverse workforce and has had some success in recent
months.  The old recruitment video, which had received a lot of criticism, has been updated
with a much more effective approach.   
Auditor Gennaco discussed the recommendations for hiring and recruiting.  It was felt it would
be good to get more community input into hiring decisions to get a different perspective.  Some
strategies were suggested with regard to increasing female representation, with particular
focus on retention.  
There were also suggestions
made regarding
finding meaningful
placements for applicants who have not yet completed academy training.  The new contract, 
which had not occurred at the time of the report, was also seen as a positive factor in recruiting
and retaining individuals.  He noted the continued cooperation of the department and the City.   
Council Member Veenker agreed with the importance of hiring officers who embrace diverse
equitable culture.  She asked how many women were hired in the last year and how many total
were currently on the force.   
Police Chief Andrew Binder believed one female was hired over the last year with around five
total in the department.   
Council Member Veenker was concerned with retention, which may not only due to personal
circumstance but also training, opportunities for advancement, being mentored, the culture in
the workplace, being free of harassment.  She asked if that was investigated or if there was any
sense of that.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
Auditor Gennaco agreed those practices were critical.  He explained that offering options for
flexibility like job sharing was an example of a way to retain individuals.   
Vice Mayor Stone noted in reading the report that there were 19,000 calls for service and 600
arrests during the time period of this report with only 1 use of force case that required report
and 3 incidents of guns drawn.  He commended the department on this and also applauded the
decision to include the race of individuals in the report.  He asked if the department had
discussed with other city departments about offering temporary jobs while applicants are
awaiting the next police academy placement.  He gave the example of the teen center having
been closed due to staffing issues as a great opportunity for those applicants to establish
relationships with the City's teens and learn more about the community.  He was concerned
about the incident with the use of personal phones and lack of access to that information.  He
hoped that would continue to be pursued.  He hoped to reach out to other departments to
learn about best practices in diversity hiring and encouraged the chief to keep an open
communication with Council about funding requests related to that.   
Chief Binder felt placements in other departments was a great recommendation and that other
city departments would be receptive.  He was also disappointed in the investigator' s decision
not to require the officers to turn the cell phone information over.  He reaffirmed that a diverse
department is a better department.   
Council Member Burt remarked on the concept of providing greater flexibility over the course
of a career, which runs counter to operating with staff shortages and extensive overtime.  He
asked for insight on recent progress allowing those practices to be implemented.   
Chief Binder stated there has been good progress over the last couple years in adding positions
and backing that up with money to recruit and retain.  As that happens, then there are more
options.  The department was very interested in the option of job sharing.   
Council Member Lythcott-Haims noted that the presence of police chief at this reporting
meeting is not currently required and asked Staff to ensure this is an expectation going forward
and to take the chief's schedule into account when scheduling this meeting.  She asked the
chief for his plans for use of the Racial Identity and Profiling Act (RIPA) data and for helping the
public make sense of it.   
Chief Binder stated there have been discussions with experts who deal specifically with data
analysis with law enforcement because the context of that data is needed to be able to draw
from that on areas that need improvement.   
Council Member Lythcott-Haims was interested to know in the future about the use of canines
in policing, what is common, and where Palo Alto stacks up in that regard.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if in addition to the above issues the investigation also looked
into how efficient the police department is at doing police work, solving and preventing crimes, 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
etc.  He also questioned the process of auditing automatic license plate readers.  He noted he
was also interested in information on canine and taser activity.   
Auditor Gennaco stated the efficiency of the department was not a part of the scope of this
work, though it is a interesting and significant issue.  An audit of the automatic license plate
readers is also not in the current scope but could be on a forward-going basis.   
Chief Binder stated the department kept its own records regarding solving rates but was unsure
if there was an external entity that does that type of analysis.   
Council Member Lauing emphasized the importance of diversity hires.   
Mayor Kou noted that the report states that not attracting applicants is one of the obstacles to
diversity hiring and noted that it is not for lack of trying.   
PUBLIC COMMENT
1. Aram James stated he met with the auditors and made some suggestions regarding letting
the community know the IPA are out there.  He detailed some of the items they discussed
and was grateful for the meeting.   
2. Winter Dellenbach was concerned about how late the IPA report was this time but was glad
to hear Auditor Gennaco recommit to releasing reports on time.  This depends on a number
of departments being timely, not just the IPA.  She noted the contract also allows for a wide
range of items able to be discussed with the IPA.   
3. Liz Gardner stated she comes from a long history of law enforcement family.  She noted
that housing costs could be part of the long-term retention of staffing.  She added that
individuals raising children and working part time are working a job and a half and that part-
time work should always be encouraged in these instances.   
NO ACTION
CONSENT CALENDAR
4. 
Approval of Three Contract Amendments to Citywide Landscaping Services Contracts to
extend the terms to September 30, 2023 and Increase Compensation as Follows: ( 1) 
Amendment No. 1 to Contract with BrightView Landscape Services, Inc. (C18170810A) 
with an increase of $305,606; (2) Amendment No. 1 to Contract with Gachina Landscape
Management, Inc. (C18170810B) with an increase of $19,972; and (3) Amendment No. 2
to Contract with Grassroots Ecology ( C18170810C) with an increase of $15,520; CEQA
Status – Categorically Exempt 15301 and 15304. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
5. 
Authorize
Amendment
No. 2 to Contract
No. C20175537
with
Kennedy
Jenks
Consultants, Inc. to extend the term of the contract for the Primary Outfall Line Project
WQ-19002) through December 31, 2027
6. 
Approve the Grade Separation Evaluation Criteria For Evaluating Alternatives Under
Consideration for Grade Separation Projects. CEQA status – Categorically exempt under
CEQA Guidelines section 15262
7. 
Adoption of Memorandum of Agreement with Utility Management and Professional
Association of Palo Alto (UMPAPA) effective upon adoption through June 30, 2025, and
Adopt revised Management and Professional salary schedule; CEQA Status - Not a
project
8. 
Approval of a Purchase of Panasonic ToughBook Replacement Equipment for Police and
Fire in the amount of $422,007 with Datec Incorporated Utilitizing an NCPA Cooperative
Agreement; and Approval of a Purchase of Replacement CradlePoint Modems with
DiscountCell, Incorporated for Police and Fire in the Amount of $168,801 Utilizing a
NASPO
Cooperative
Agreement; and a Budget
Amendment
in the Information
Technology Fund; CEQA Status—not a project
9. 
Approval of Office of City Auditor Electronic Payment Process and Controls Audit Report; 
CEQA Status – Not a Project
10. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of a Permanent Ordinance Amending Titles 18 and 21 to
Implement State Housing Legislation from the 2021 Legislative Session, Including SB 9. 
Environmental Analysis: Exempt from Environmental Analysis under CEQA Guidelines
Section 15061(b)(3) and Government Code Sections 66411.7(n) and 65852.21(j). The
Planning and Transportation Commission ( PTC) has recommended Council adopt the
ordinance. (FIRST READING: May 22, 2023 PASSED 7-0) 
11. 
Approval of a Protocol for Council Member Co-Hosting of Neighborhood Town Hall
Meetings
12. 
Approval of 2023-2024 Boards, Commissions and Commission Committees Work Plans:  
A. Architectural Review Board
B. Historic Resources Board
C. Park and Recreation Commission
D. Planning and Transportation Commission
E. Public Art Commission
F. Stormwater Management Oversight Committee
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
G. Utilities Advisory Commission
PUBLIC COMMENT
Stew Plock, speaking on behalf of a group of Palo Alto residents, applauded the Council possibly
reconsidering the viaduct strategy for the railway corridor.  He believed that was the best
strategy for rail, auto, bike, and pedestrian traffic.  His group planned to speak further at the
next Rail Committee meeting.   
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 7-8. 
Mayor Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 6. 
MOTION: Council Member Lythcott-Haims moved, seconded by Council Member Veenker, to
approve Agenda Item Numbers 4-12. 
MOTION PASSED 4-5, 9-12: 7-0
MOTION PASSED 6: 6-1, Kou no
MOTION PASSED 7-8: 6-1, Tanaka no
Council Member Tanaka presented figures explaining that the raises proposed in item 7
equated to about an 11% raise, double the current inflation rate of about 4.9%.  In combination
with massive utility rate increases, mass layoffs in the community, and two major recent bank
failures, he could not support Item Number 7.  He did not support Item Number 8 due to paying
extra for a 5-year warranty when the ToughBooks were only supposed to last 4 years and also
felt it should have been included in the budget already.   
Mayor Kou felt the evaluation criteria worked except Item I.  She felt the word "consider" was
not as strong as the previous " minimize," and with the viaduct potentially being brought back
for consideration, stronger language was needed.   
CITY MANAGER COMMENTS
Ed Shikada, City Manager, spoke about the recent Neighborhood Town Hall and stated these
will be planned quarterly.  He listed some upcoming opportunities for community engagement
and noted the planned 3rd Thursday events on California Avenue.  He also discussed notable
upcoming Council agenda items. 
The Council took a 10-minute break.   
ACTION ITEMS
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
13. 
Direction on Operating Model for Palo Alto Animal Shelter, Which May Include: 
Negotiating A New Agreement with Pets In Need; Moving to In-House Service Delivery; 
and/ or Issuing a New Request For Proposals. CEQA Review – Not a Project
Community Services Director Kristen O’Kane explained the revised recommendation from Staff
that the Council discussion and direction focus on PIN's response to previous Council questions, 
with only a cursory review of the in-house alternative currently.  She reviewed previous Council
actions and discussions and described the current agreement with PIN as well as the key terms
of the new agreement.  She also reviewed the proposed FY24 budget.  
Assistant to City Manager Lupita Alamos gave a high-level presentation of the in-house shelter
analysis.  She reviewed the proposed cost and staffing summary for the in-house model as well
as a comparison of the scope of services between PIN and an in-house model.   
City Manager Ed Shikada wanted to avoid any potential comparisons that would potentially put
all parties in an adversarial discussion.  The discussion should be one of identifying the areas of
common interest and developing
service offerings based upon those interests and the
community' s needs.   
Laura Toller Gardner, Pets In Need CEO, stated the goal of the presentation was to address the
questions posed in March and received since then.  She underlined the power of partnership
that PIN brings to the City.  There are two shelters, two medical clinics, and a mobile clinic, with
the center in Palo Alto an open-intake shelter.  She noted that the mobile clinic serves Palo
Alto, Redwood City, East Palo Alto, East Menlo Park, San Jose, and other communities.  It
delivers access to care and community medicine, allowing support to those who need it in
order to keep animals in their homes and not in shelters.  It was important to focus on the Palo
Alto Shelter but also on what can be done with the mobile clinic.  She noted that PIN currently
has 2 FTE dedicated to outreach and access to care; Palo Alto would pay for 0.75 FTE and PIN
would pay 1.25 in outreach and all program expenses, including all it takes to put the mobile
clinic on the road.  In FY23, PIN underwrote in-jurisdiction access-to-care services by $185K.  
The total organizational budget in FY23 was $5.7M; Palo Alto was $1.2M of that, approximately
21% of the organization.   
Teri Dunwoody, Pets In Need Director of Finance & Budget, spoke about the new contract
proposal.  She discussed the budget proposal, with PIN proposing to managing the shelter with
12.3 FTE.  This level of staffing is necessary to run the shelter, for the safety and wellbeing of
the animals and the quality of services needed.  The contract fee proposed was $1.37M for year
one, and she detailed the expenses involved in that.  The capital improvements requested by
PIN are only for strategic improvements, which she further detailed.   
Laura Birdsall, Pets In Need Director of Shelter Operations, explained that the Palo Alto Shelter
is open-intake, meaning that any animals in jurisdiction cannot be turned away.  Total animals
taken in for 2022 was 671 with 312 sent out for foster in 62 foster homes.  The volunteer hours
from 2022 were 1471, and there were 446 total spay/ neuters.  The save rate for the year was
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
98%.  She described the importance of foster homes and behavioral management.  She spoke
about PIN's veterinary team led by Dr. Barbie Laderman- Jones and the medical services
available through the PIN medical team.  Regarding spay/ neuter statistics, in FY23, there were
up to 60 procedures per month and in FY24, the average will be 80 to 90 per month.  Finally, 
she discussed adoption services and how PIN works to ensure success with adoptions.  Of the
adoptions in 2022, 72% were from in jurisdiction and 28% were transferred in.   
Council Member Lauing questioned the discrepancy between PIN's forecasted $ 250K revenue
and the Staff's forecast of $400K.  He also asked about the difference between projected
surgeries.  He asked Staff if they believed the $55K interim compensation was appropriate.   
Assistant to City Manager Alamos stated that over a 10-year trend line, that revenue was typical
for adoptions, medical procedures, and other services, not including Mountain View in those
calculations.  The surgery numbers were also based on past experience.   
Ms. Dunwoody felt PIN's estimate was accurate based on the current numbers and that fees
were intentionally kept low to maintain access to care.  She added there was not demand in
jurisdiction for 150 spay/ neuters per month.   
Director O’Kane wanted to take a deeper dive into how that $55K number was developed.  In
the sense that this has been under negotiation for some time and that having the contract start
in June is ideal, it would be appropriate.   
Council Member Burt had questions about the way the capital items were budgeted.  There was
further discussion about this.   
Vice Mayor Stone asked what happens when a stray-hold animal needs services after hours if
that is no longer included in the proposed PIN contract.  He asked for clarification that the cost
estimates for salary and benefits for staffing the in-house model at $1.2M included expected
pension costs as well, which was correct.   
Animal Control Officer Cody McCartney answered that the closest clinic is the MedVet Clinic in
Mountain View.  The proposal is that the City would pick up the cost for the after-hours care.   
Council Member Veenker felt it was most important to invest in the physical facility regardless
of who is running it.  She was concerned with the proposed in-house model being open Monday
through Saturday with every other Friday closed, considering when people have time off to take
animals in.  She asked what happened if someone outside of jurisdiction comes in with an
animal.  She questioned the transition costs if the City were to take over running the shelter.   
Ms. Birdsall responded that when able, PIN would intake the animal and transport it to the
appropriate jurisdictional shelter.  Preventative services are mostly reserved for when the
vaccine clinic is running.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
Assistant to City Manager Alamos stated that transition costs were not calculated in the staff
report.   
Council Member Tanaka wanted a more detailed breakdown regarding the difference in
revenue estimates between in-house and PIN.  He asked how the in-house model was able to
be staffed with so many less people.  He asked whether Palo Alto was reimbursed by the other
cities serviced and if that covered the cost.   
Assistant to City Manager Alamos stated that in reviewing whether this was the appropriate
model and consulting with experts, the proposal provided the capacity and appropriate level of
care to support the hours of operation and care for the animals.  It does not necessarily include
the same services PIN focuses on as PIN also has a mobile clinic, marketing, and additional
services.  She also responded that there was a contract with Los Altos and Los Altos Hills to
receive revenue for services provided.   
Director O'Kane added that it was to offset the time the animal control officers spend in Los
Altos and Los Altos Hills and was based on actual number of calls the ACOs do in those cities.   
Council Member Tanaka further questioned how this works if the other cities are not paying for
usage of the facility.   
Director O'Kane stated that Los Altos Hills pays 4% of actual program costs and LA pays a little
over 11%.  She stated she could return with more numbers.   
Assistant to City Manager Alamos added residents of Los Altos and Los Altos Hills seeking
services such as spay/ neuter and boarding were still charged a fee.  A fee analysis could be
done if the Council was interested.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if the spay/ neuter program was profitable.  
Ms. Dunwoody felt it was unlikely that the fees cover the entire cost but that that was
intentional as the model is to provide access to care.   
Council Member Tanaka wanted to figure out how much money was lost per service for
nonresidents and did not believe the City should be subsidizing that.   
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked how many FTE were devoted to adoption services
through PIN versus in-house, both the number and the percentage of overall staff, to get an
idea of the primary work. 
Ms. Toller Gardner stated PIN had 2.5 FTE specifically for adoption
services but with
contribution from several other staff, including foster staff, behaviorist, animal care manager.   
Assistant to City Manager Alamos stated the in-house model would have two administrative
staff providing the public-facing service and, like PIN, would have other staff included in the
process.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
Mayor Kou asked if it was possible to have volunteer staff to help with the adoption process.  
She asked if there was a consideration for opening seven days a week.  She suggested the
modular building be used as a showing area for cats and small animals.   
Ms. Birdsall stated it was possible for volunteers to supplement the adoption counselors, but
some tasks were better handled by Staff.  With respect to animal care, there was not usually
enough volunteer support to routinely fill out a schedule and Staff were ultimately accountable
for that.  She stated that opening seven days a week would involve increasing the staff
headcount and added that the competitive job environment was a challenge.  She stated the
modular building had been used for showing areas for certain events but that it was not set up
in order to be easily cleaned and sanitized.  That area has been used for socializing dogs, but
cats get upset by being moved that distance.   
Mayor Kou asked how much effort is devoted to training and retraining and animal before
euthanizing.   
Ms. Birdsall explained this is not an issue with cats.  With regard to dogs, the primary concern is
safety of the staff and the community.  If there are safety concerns with an animal, the
behaviorist gives recommendations for medical interventions.  If medical conditions are ruled
out and medication is not rendering the animal safe to work with, potential rescue placements
are considered.  If that is not possible, the case is moved onto a committee of staff to discuss
potential outcome options.  If it continues to be in the best interest of public safety and the
welfare of the animal (for example, an aggressive dog living the rest of its life in a cage), then
euthanasia decisions are considered.   
PUBLIC COMMENT
1. 
Jeannette Washington, Animal Control Officer with PAPD, felt that PIN's model did not
align with the needs of the City and its citizens.  She stated that PIN has continued to
struggle with meeting the needs of the municipality and did not have the knowledge, 
policies, or staff to adequately provide all necessary services needed by the community.  
She stated off-hours medical care and aid in animal control investigations were crucial
services to keep animals and the community safe.   
2. 
Leonor Delgado stated PIN's proposed 60 spay/ neuter surgeries per month was nowhere
the number needed in this community.  She asked the City Council make the City-
operated proposal of 150 an absolute minimum with whichever organization administers
the shelter and that any shelter operator be required to provide this basic service.  More
spay and neuter equals fewer roaming cats.   
3. 
Kadri Corrollo ( Zoom), Animal Control Officer for Palo Alto, stated she was familiar with
the ins and outs of both organizations' operating models, having previously worked at PIN.  
She stated that over the last four years, PIN has drastically reduced services available to
the public, including spay and neuter, and proposes even more reductions.  She noted the
high staff turnover at PIN makes it difficult for the shelter to run efficiently.  She felt the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
current contract had not saved the City any money and the new contract terms will cost
even more than it would to bring operations back in house.   
4. 
Rashi Sharma ( Zoom), resident of Los Altos and local high school student, did not want
feral cats to be released locally as feral cats hunt birds, reduce the food available to hawks
and other raptors, and infect wildlife with toxoplasmosis.  She asked the Council not to
contract with PIN if they continue to pursue a change to the policy of not releasing cats
into the environment.   
5. 
Aram James ( Zoom) noted the citizens were happy with the service in 2015 and was
interested in the more detailed conversation in August about keeping the City.  He also
noted a new, updated facility was necessary and that fundraising could be done to
accomplish that.   
6. 
Anni Yang (Zoom), Chair of the Environmental Action Committee of the Santa Clara Valley
Audubon Society, noted that trap/ neuter/ release programs often fail to reduce the overall
feral cat populations and removing the cats altogether was a better, more compassionate
way to control cat populations.  She hoped there would be no changes to the current
policy against releasing feral cats. 
7. 
KC Hetterly ( Zoom), intern with Santa Clara Valley Audubon Society, noted the effect of
feral cats on the bird population and the harm of trap/ neuter/ release programs on the
cats themselves.  She stated Palo Alto had the ideal policy of prohibiting the release of
feral cats in the City and asked to maintain the policy or ensure that a decision of policy
change went through Council.   
8. 
Linda Ruthruff ( Zoom) described the negative effects of feral cats on local ecosystems.  
She stated TNR was not the answer to feral cats as these colonies remain stable for years
with new cats finding their way to the colony and people learning of the colonies dumping
unwanted cats there.  She wanted to protect the biodiversity of Palo Alto by continuing to
prohibit TNR. 
9. 
Eileen McLaughlin ( Zoom), representing Citizens' Committee to Complete the Refuge, 
hoped that the City would continue to prevent return of feral cats.  She encouraged
looking into the way PIN will prevent the release of feral cats in Palo Alto.   
10. 
Sachi Hwangbo ( Zoom), who was Volunteer Coordinator of Palo Alto Animal Services, 
stated the City-run shelter was community minded and felt PIN had little presence in the
community.  She noted the City once ran a thriving neonatal foster program for orphaned
kittens that has whittled away to only a few fosters.  She felt PIN's operation was unstable
and lacked continuity.  She hoped to see Palo Alto Animal Services return.   
11. 
Liz Gardner ( Zoom) spoke about the low-income aspect of spay/ neuter and the arduous
form required by PIN.  She believed low-income people were in need of pets, especially
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
during a time of isolation and separation.  She addressed the issue of reaching out to the
demographics that consider purebred pets over adoption.   
12. 
Shani Kleinhaus, Environmental Advocate for Santa Clara Valley Audubon Society, felt TNR
was not the most important thing to be discussed but was the main focus for Audubon.  
She wanted to be clear about continuing the policy of not releasing feral cats, which is not
good for them.   
13. 
Karen Holman, speaking on behalf of Tom DuBois, Terry Holzemer, Winter Dellenbach, 
Carol Kiparsky, Ian Irwin, Pat Hernandez ( 7), noted the 2015 audit stated the animal
shelter faced findings unlikely to be resolved if it continued functioning as solely a City-
managed function, and she was surprised that this was being looked at as an option.  She
stated the shelter facility was outdated and did not meet standards for animal care.  She
stated there was an area in the back of the facility that was ripe for expansion of the
shelter.  The staff report indicated no improvements or allocation of funding for shelter
improvements was intended, which was in contradiction to the audit and to the wellbeing
of animals.  Shelter improvements need to be done no matter who manages it.  She was
concerned about the hours of operation, as weekends are the critical days.  She stated she
saw no advantage to continuing consideration of an in-house model for all of the listed
reasons.   
Council Member Veenker would like to see the current feral cat policies continued and wanted
to update the term sheet to align with that, amending Item M to " Both parties will work
together to develop a transparent and humane feral cat program reflective of municipal best
practices and reflective of the impact on public health and wildlife and that maintains the
current practice where PIN does not release feral cats or cause them to be released."  Looking
at the two proposals, she saw ways in which both fall somewhat short of what would be ideal.  
Given the reduction of hours and personnel under the current City plan, she did not feel it was
the time to bring it back in house.  She proposed proceeding as quickly as possible with the
scheduled capital improvements, continuing with PIN now, making sure PIN knows what the
City wants in order to negotiate a deal that requires the needed services, and , including a
termination clause that could be exercised if PIN is not provided the expected services.   
Council Member Lauing supported the City Manager' s recommendation not to take final action
tonight but thought the preference should be a term sheet with PIN.  He noted that the new
management team at PIN was a good thing because there were problems and the organization
has righted itself.  These executives have made sense in terms of their commitment and what
they want to do.  He was concerned about the in-house model being incomplete as far as costs.  
He stated PIN had the full services in place and the hours were more accommodating.  He
noted that the Redwood City location was a place for advanced medical treatment, overflow
space, access to more pet inventory plus a staff of over 40 people who could fill in when
needed, and is already in place.  In contrast, the in-house model has to ramp up from zero.  He
wanted very clear language on the TNR, clarification on number of surgeries, and review of
revenue opportunities. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
Vice Mayor Stone asked if Staff felt the capital requests from PIN were not necessary.  
City Manager Shikada stated that was not Staff's position and that they were operating with a
lack of plan going forward on the in-house model site.   
Vice Mayor Stone stated there would clearly need to be some changes on the facility and that
would likely increase costs in the future.  He asked if Staff had discussed the practicality and
viability of PIN remaining in place while the in-house model was being implemented.   
Director O'Kane stated that had not been explored.   
Vice Mayor Stone stated that after seeing the side-by-side analysis, he did not see much reason
to go in house.  
Costs were essentially the same without even including the capital
improvements that will be necessary.  He did not see how keeping a leaner staffing model
would allow for the same services.  He was not confident that the City could match PIN's
extensive volunteer network and fundraising.  He was happy to stick with PIN, with more clarity
on the TNR policies.   
Council Member Burt largely concurred with the other council members.  He wanted to
reconcile the different perspectives on the spay and neuter in which PIN states they are
meeting the demand and Staff states PIN is considerably below what they anticipate as
demand.  He wanted to clarify that the City did not want release of TNR cats, which was
consistent with what PIN had said was their current practice.  He wanted to know, if there was
concern over PIN's approach, what the City did differently in the past.  He stated PIN has their
own set of priorities, some of which are aligned with the City, and he felt there needed to be a
greater balancing of the models in the negotiation or have PIN pick up more cost difference.  He
was interested in Los Altos and Los Altos Hills bearing a fair proportionate share of costs.  He
wanted to ask Staff to return with a refined contract proposal.   
Council Member Tanaka wanted to give Staff very clear direction and specificity for negotiation.  
He asked if Staff was able to review the contract with Los Altos and Los Altos Hills as discussed
earlier.  
Director O'Kane first clarified that Los Altos and Los Altos Hills pay a percentage of actual
program costs, both at the shelter and for the animal control officers.  That number is based on
the average percentage of animals handled from those jurisdictions.  She felt the numbers were
pretty accurate.   
Council Member Tanaka was interested in knowing more about the unit costs and getting cost
recovery if that is not covered.  He felt it was important to figure out the numbers for surgeries
and also a level of service guarantee related to time frame or quality.  He agreed with the
suggestion of being able to terminate if PIN is not providing the services the community needs.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
MOTION: Council Member Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Tanaka, to direct Staff
to negotiate an agreement with Pets In Need (PIN) and bring back to Council in August with the
following amendments and review: 
1. No Trap/ Neuter/ Return (TNR) changes, through language such as: “ Both parties will
work together to develop a transparent and humane feral cat program reflective of
municipal best practices and the impact on public health and wildlife, and that
maintains the current practice where PIN does not release feral cats or cause them
to be released.” 
2. Review on the number of surgeries
3. Higher revenue opportunities
4. Consider a possible 3-year contract
5. Level of service and termination clause
6. Reporting and oversight
7. Spayed and neutered metrics
There was discussion on the wording of the motion. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
14. 
Approval of Homekey Lease Agreement with LifeMoves for use of 1237 San Antonio
Road for a term of 9 years and Revenue Agreement with Santa Clara County to enable
the County to execute an operating agreement with LifeMoves for interim housing
operations
City Manager Ed Shikada hoped tonight's motion would set in motion the beginning of
construction.   
Assistant to City Manager Melissa McDonough stated the three things Council would look at
tonight were a lease, a revenue agreement, and project elements removed.  Palo Alto Homekey
will be a modular interim housing shelter located at 1237 San Antonio Road, on a portion of the
former Los Altos Treatment Plant.  To accommodate the Homekey Project, GreenWaste
operations will move to the back of the site with fencing and landscaping separating it from the
shelter.  The project includes family and individual units with some communal areas in between
and rooms for support services.  She presented and explained a comparison between several
shelters regarding sleeping rooms, construction costs, and site attributes.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
Aubrey Merriman, LifeMoves CEO, reaffirmed commitment to this project and the impact it will
make in the community.  He stated there are pros and cons of the site location and the focus
should be getting the project going and providing an environment of dignity and respect with a
robust service system for these individuals.  He looked forward to optimizing the space.  
LifeMoves wants to be transparent and share successes and failings during this process, 
remaining in constant communication and allowing access to the staff, clients, and community
for conversations on a regular basis.  LifeMoves wants to be held accountable for delivering the
highest level of service.  He stated LifeMoves has taken the learnings from the Mountain View
shelter and implemented them in the Navigation Center and will also apply the learnings from
the Navigation Center to the shelter in Palo Alto.  It is always going to be an iterative process.   
Brian Greenberg, LifeMoves Programs and Services, gave an overview of the service model, 
providing a safe environment for the most vulnerable clients as well as volunteers and staff.  
The facility will be serving single adults as well as families.  The model is for each household to
receive a comprehensive assessment, which leads to a case plan toward exiting homelessness
and securing stable housing.  The goal is to remove barriers to housing.  There will be a
minimum of 2 staff on site 24/ 7/365.  He stated this facility would make a difference in Palo
Alto.   
Deputy City Manager Chantal Cotton-Gaines reviewed the key terms of the lease agreement
with LifeMoves, which will give LifeMoves access to the site in order to do construction and
operate the facility built at the site.  It is a 9-year term, which allows for construction and 7
years of operation at $1/year for rent.  She reviewed the four-party letter of intent between the
City, LifeMoves, Santa Clara County Office of Supportive Housing as well as Santa Clara County
Housing Authority.  She reviewed the revenue agreement with Santa Clara County, which
allows the City to pass through the funds allocated for operations.  It is a 7-year agreement at
1M/ year, and there are several operational performance metrics to be monitored.  
Assistant to City Manager McDonough stated Palo Alto Homekey is supported and funded by a
wide variety of stakeholders.  She reviewed the current capital projection, with the capital
funding sources and expenses, and the Staff recommendations for funding allocation.  She
presented a list of the project elements removed and presented rough estimate costs for the
elements Staff had anticipated Council may want to reinstate.  Staff recommended approving
the lease agreement with LifeMoves and revenue agreement with Santa Clara County as well as
providing direction on which project elements to reinstate.   
PUBLIC COMMENT
1. 
Liz Gardner urged the Council to reconsider this plan.  She questioned how the families
will connect with the community, living at a wastewater and waste management site, not
near any transit, jobs, or shopping.  She stated there were plenty of sites to reconsider
that would allow these individuals to integrate and be a part of the community and asked
to make this habitable and acceptable.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
2. 
Aram James spoke about caseworker turnover with LifeMoves.  He felt the project would
not work and would be a loss of taxpayer money.  He felt it was a bad project in the wrong
place, isolating unhoused people without any guarantee they will move from temporary
to permanent housing.  He wanted to put this money into permanent housing as this is a
failed project from the beginning.   
Mayor Kou suggested people tour the facility and learn more about it.   
Vice Mayor Stone asked what safeguards were in place to provide accountability.   
Consuelo Hernandez, Director of Office of Supportive Housing County of Santa Clara, stated
there is a systemwide performance each development has to meet.  Because this project is
new, there is not a specific benchmark for emergency interim housing, so it is treated like
temporary shelter.  The benchmark for that is that 30% of participants enrolled in the program
exit to permanent housing, but the County sees that number closer to 78%.  There will be
monthly reports to the Housing, Land Use, Transportation, and Environment Committee and
performance reports each time the City is invoiced.   
Vice Mayor Stone asked how school selections work for school-age children and what happens
to the students enrolled in the district when a family moves to permanent housing.   
Mr. Greenberg stated there would be a fulltime children' s services coordinator involved in
transportation, ensuring children attend school, homework club, and individual tutors.  He
stated that the general practice is that upon moving into interim housing, the students continue
at the same school they had been enrolled in.  Once they move to permanent housing, the
transition is facilitated between the current school, the future school, and LifeMoves.   
Council Member Veenker asked if the County had similar agreements with Mountain View or
Redwood City with respect to the revenue agreement and operational performance metrics.  
Regarding the things that had been cut, she felt solar/ energy storage was key.  Items she
wanted to see included if possible were irrigation metering device, water reuse, and Energy
Star Profile Manager.  She was concerned whether water reuse might be harder to put in later
than some of the other things.   
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gaines explained that Palo Alto had decided to bring in the County
in the capacity of knowing how a shelter should be run without the City having to build that
staff capacity.  Mountain View does not have the same structure, but the key difference is that
LifeMoves owns the Mountain View property.  Palo Alto is both property owner and partner in
the project. 
Director Hernandez stated the County was currently negotiating a very similar revenue
agreement with Mountain View, proposing $ 2.4M in matching grant funds combined with the
City's $2.4M.  Partnering increases the outcomes by thinking strategically.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
George Hoyt, Chief Building Official, stated water reuse would be very costly to put in at a later
date.  The infrastructure would need to be put in during the construction.   
Council Member Veenker stated this project was good for the community.  The location may be
imperfect, but the delay could be tremendous in waiting to find a new location.  She supported
the staff recommendation.   
Council Member Burt stated Finance Committee did not receive the breakdown of the optional
elements and had an aggregate amount that was considered to be optional.  The Council is
looking at making this decision out of the context of the other Tier 2 items that there would be
tradeoffs on.  He stated solar was the biggest dollar and asked for more information about that.  
He also wanted to confirm that there were food services on site.   
Tony Taormino, Devcon Construction, stated the PV system that is currently priced maxes out
the total roof space on the modular boxes, about 135-kW system.  It was not clear how much
energy that would offset.  He stated it would be important to get the infrastructure
incorporated into the modular boxes ($60K-$70K), which is the conduit run inside the walls, and
pull strings later, and about $20K to do the design.   
Mr. Greenberg responded that all sites provide three meals a day.   
Council Member Burt noted other housing that is contiguous with industrial sites.  Impacts like
noise or hazardous materials are what matter, and he did not believe those issues existed at
this site.  There is a very limited number of undeveloped City-owned parcels of 2 acres, and this
will be transformative for unhoused residents.  He noted the Charities Housing project on El
Camino with 130 units for very low and extremely low income as a natural transitional project
for many folks to be able to go on to permanent housing.   
Council Member Lauing agreed that the location was good and the project was terrific.  He
asked who gets the $500K in fees.  He asked for clarification that the timeline was to begin in
July 2023 and finish end of 2024.   
Assistant to City Manager McDonough stated the fees were for cost recovery for the
development center, so it is money that comes back to the City.  The TCO on the last schedule
was February.  The work would be done, but the final inspections and Certificate of Occupancy
would be in February.   
Council Member Tanaka stated the City would be putting in about $53M, a substantial amount
of resources for a very important problem.  He felt the money should go toward helping the
maximum number of people possible.  He presented a chart from the Almanac with data from
Santa Clara County showing that LifeMoves was one of the bottom performers in terms of
placing people.  He asked if might be better to focus that $53M more on permanent housing, 
which has a much better success rate.  He asked about personnel issues and reports of sexual
assault, what action happened regarding that, and how long it took for action to occur.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 21 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
Marie Jackson, LifeMoves Marketing Director, stated there was a no-tolerance policy for any
harassment
or other allegations.  
Once the issue came up, LifeMoves
did their own
investigation and those involved were pulled from the site and then dismissed from the
organization.   
Council Member Tanaka questioned how much the CEO makes compared to the average
worker.  He believed that should be public as it was important to show that the money being
spent on the program is going to help the people that it is trying to help.   
Paul Simpson, LifeMoves Chief Financial Officer, stated LifeMoves runs equity compensation
surveys and the staff are compensated at the 75th percentile or better.  The overall programs
budget is about 80% of the budget.  He noted those were great benchmarks within the sector.   
Council Member Tanaka felt the operations metric that mattered most to the people in the City
was how many people were no longer unhoused.  He asked about the efficacy of the program
to actually accomplishing that.  He questioned what happens to the land in the event LifeMoves
does not perform and under what conditions the agreement could be terminated.   
Director Hernandez stated between the period of May 1, 2022, and April 30, 2023, 158
homeless households connected to Palo Alto were assessed for the first time.  In anticipation of
the lease up of the site, an outreach strategy would be convened with the County, the City, the
police department and the service providers for those individuals.  She noted the number of
people helped through this program would be included in the reports.  She clarified that the
performance outcomes for the site are related to the exit destination of the people enrolled; 
LifeMoves would not be required to reduce the number of homeless people in the City of Palo
Alto.   
Council Member Tanaka felt the $2M should be held in reserve and that any money put into the
project should go toward the people it is helping, not things like solar panels.  The amount of
people being helped by the program is more of a trophy than how environmentally friendly it is.  
He asked the anticipated cost per person being helped.   
Assistant to City Manager McDonough did not believe that calculation had been done.   
Mr. Simpson stated the overall operating costs were roughly $4M a year for this particular site.  
There was not a per-person cost metric as every individual is different and receives their own
individual support services plan.   
Council Member Lythcott-Haims stated that this location was subpar despite tremendous
effort.  It was completely isolated, which was not conducive to reintegrating residents back into
the community.  Regardless of that, she was wholly in favor of the project and was confident
that the City and LifeMoves would learn from this project and process to deploy those learnings
into the next project.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 22 of 22
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 06/ 12/2023
Mayor Kou questioned how the quarterly report is received.  She felt it was good to involve the
community in this knowledge.  She asked about parking concerns and how that was working in
Mountain View.   
Assistant to City Manager McDonough stated the report would come to City Staff and could be
made public on a quarterly or annual basis.  The first couple quarters, there will not be much to
report.   
Mr. Simpson stated the Mountain View has 19 parking spots and there have been no issues or
complaints with parking.   
Mayor Kou noted for the future Finance Committee discussion that some of the items are
related to health and would benefit the people living there.   
ORIGINAL MOTION: Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Council Member Lauing to:  
A. Approve a Homekey Lease Agreement with LifeMoves for use of 1237 San Antonio Road
for a term of nine years, and; 
B. Approve a Revenue Agreement with Santa Clara County to enable the County to execute
an operating agreement with LifeMoves for interim housing operations, and;  
C. Consideration of Tier 2 reinstatements deferred until June 19 when the Council is
reviewing FY24 budget
Council Member Tanaka noted that using the previous numbers, he calculated about $40K per
person.  He questioned the ability to retain the land if the needed services were not provided. 
City Attorney Molly Stump stated the performance standards are not contained directly in the
lease but are in the agreement between the City and the County.  In that agreement, there is a
discussion of efforts that both the County and the City would make to address problems with
performance.   
Council Member Burt clarified that using the numbers listed, it comes out to about $13K per
resident to move from unhoused through complete support services, which is phenomenally
low, and that including the capital costs in that calculation was specious.   
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Stone to call the question
limit the debate). 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no
ORIGINAL MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no
ADJOURNMENT:  The meeting was adjourned at 12:10 A.M. 
