Page 1 of 23
CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Special Meeting
Friday, March 31, 2023
CALL TO ORDER
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 4:00 p.m. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone arrived 4:39 p.m., Veenker
Present Remotely:     None
Absent: 
Tanaka
City Clerk Lesley Milton declared there was a quorum.  
Mayor Kou noted there would first be interviews for the PTC, then the Historic Resources
Board, and then the Utilities Advisory Commission.   
PUBLIC COMMENT
None.  
ACTION ITEMS
1. 
Interview and Consider Appointment for Openings on the Utilities Advisory Committee, 
Planning and Transportation Commission and Historic Resources Board
Mayor Kou outlined the interview process and noted it would be about a 10-minute process for
each candidate.  
The Council interviewed the following candidates:  
Planning & Transportation Commission
George Lu found lobbying awkward but the issues important and interesting. He thought he
could offer valuable perspectives to the City. He spoke of his vision of Palo Alto. He addressed
infilling parking lots with architecturally beautiful mixed-use buildings with open space and
connecting the spaces with bike lanes, which was a vision to have all commercial and retail
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
connectable with a 25-minute bike ride and which would fulfill the Housing Element with
potentially room to spare. He discussed building affordable housing and promoting diversity in
a politically feasible way with community benefits to reduce climate impact. He was here to
promote and advance that mission and vision. His ulterior motive was to bring back parts of
Palo Alto he had loved, like the Nut House, etc. He wanted make Palo Alto more dynamic, open, 
and capable of supporting community building and small businesses. He outlined his experience
and had worked at Meta as a product manager working on policy initiatives and led the
misinformation
product
covering
critical
elections. His
scope
in
urban
planning
and
transportation had largely come from being an enthusiast and a follower of urban planning
principles. This all culminated in 2018 when he worked for Bird scooters, which related to how
micro-mobility city policies, technical products, and transportation could improve communities. 
He felt a calling to make the city and community more livable.  
Council Member Burt asked what transportation needs he thought were highest priority and
most doable in the community. 
George Lu thought there were levels to the highest priority and doable transportation needs. 
He suggested addressing what already worked. From there, he thought there was a level of
more ambitious projects, and the project nearest and dearest to his heart was bike lanes. From
there, he was interested in micro-mobility and the bus programs and thought an advocate on
the PTC could raise issues up the chain. He would prioritize micro-mobility and mass transit.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims questioned what experience he had in bringing people on
board with a vision they may not have been inclined to embrace. 
George Lu commented that bringing people onboard had been part of his job for several years. 
He provided examples of his experience at Bird and Meta. He mentioned connecting bike lanes
and using surface lots for affordable housing. He opined that issues needed to be addressed
consistently and deliberately. In closing, he remarked that he fundamentally cared deeply about
making the city more diverse and equitable and a more dynamic place to live. He would love to
engage with the PTC and make that happen over the long term.  
Arthur Keller had been on the Planning Commission previously. He was involved in the bike
bridge over 101, so he had seen how working slow and steady around policies could make a
difference. 
Council Member Veenker inquired if he thought it was important to have a range of
perspectives represented on the Commission and, if not, how he would ensure he heard and
understood views of fellow residents on issues before the Commission. 
Arthur Keller believed the Commission should represent a range of views and should also
represent the views of various members of the city. He did not ride bicycles often but he did
insist on building a bike bridge because it was important for those who did. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Council Member Lauing asked if he could control the PTC agenda what he would rank as the top
three most important issues.  
Arthur Keller voiced the first issue should be the Housing Element, secondly transportation and
figuring out where to put bike lanes and how to reduce the impact of traffic, and thirdly
rezoning sites for housing required in the Housing Element. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims inquired if he could site a PTC decision he disagreed with. 
Arthur Keller outlined why he disagreed with the policy of having built two lines on El Camino
Real.  
Council Member Burt requested his thoughts on the rezoning sites that were put in the element
submitted to the State compared to his priorities. 
Arthur Keller [ inaudible] selecting those sites. The sites represented [ inaudible]. He explained
why he wanted more sites on Stanford Research Park, but that could not be done.  
Mayor Kou questioned what he saw as the primary role of the Commission. 
Arthur Keller remarked that the primary role of the PTC was to give advice to City Council on
land use and transportation issues. He noted that the PTC was a very important body, which
had a requirement to abide by the law and implement the Housing Element, but he thought
there was leeway in terms of doing that. He would like to be on the Commission or give his
vision in terms of the future of the city.  
Allen Akin indicated that he was minimizing his personal introduction as he had spoken to many
Council members recently. He entered this through interest in transportation issues, and then
the connection to housing became a necessary part of that analysis. He had been involved with
a couple projects with City staff, and electeds had asked him to contribute his experience to
PTC. He noted that he did not come with an all-encompassing vision but with a dedication to
get needed work done.  
Council Member Lauing queried what he had learned from his personal experience of spending
three years on an EIR.  
Allen Akin answered that he had learned the importance of the relationship with staff and a
respect for the abilities of staff under the constraints they operated, which was not a widely
held skill but was a crucial role PTC needed. Having a personal background with EIR
development provided him understanding of the process and limits of it.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims requested he choose one topic of the three on his application
that he suggested needed attention and provide his vision and address how he would approach
convincing whomever may not agree with him.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Allen Akin stated grade separation was the low-hanging fruit and needed to be addressed first. 
He was persuaded by PTC meetings that the downtown area plan was not the highest priority
of things to be considered. He opined that concentration on the San Antonio area should be
next, and he outlined his vision.  
Council Member Burt requested his thoughts for bringing vitality back to downtown and
whether the greater downtown area should be a site for significant new housing.  
Allen Akin indicated that answering that was tricky because no one knew what return-to-work
would look like. He believed return-to-work would happen on a large scale, so there would not
be freedom to drastically reorganize use of the built space downtown. The people not yet being
back affected the freedom to make changes, for example consolidating properties and type of
businesses. He was indifferent about the greater downtown being a site for new housing. He
indicated that housing located with work would not eliminate transportation demands. He
voiced that housing downtown was a good thing for the vitality of the city but would not be a
cure for transportation issues or for the return of retail, and he spoke of systematic changes in
retail due to online shopping.  
Council Member Veenker inquired if he had thoughts on how to work in groups to move things
forward efficiently and effectively and what returning something helpful to Council should look
like.  
Allen Akin stated he had read the HCD comments and found most of them to be reasonable. 
Civility in the operation of the Commission was very important in getting things done. In
summary, he thanked Council for their consideration. He hoped to have a chance to make
Council members’ lives easier in the future.  
Scott O’Neil spoke of his passion regarding housing, displacement due to housing costs, and the
unhoused. He believed more housing needed to be built, jobs were needed, and economic
development needed to be spurred while building out of the housing shortage. He stated the
effects on people and human wellbeing needed to be considered by commissions. He spoke of
his experience and background, including being president of his HOA and being on the Board
for 8 to 10 years, which they had addressed some parking and transportation issues, etc. He has
also sued a developer.  
Mayor Kou asked his position
regarding
proper balance related to dense cities with
entertainment, retail, parks, etc.  
Scott O’Neil spoke of a study related to natural experiments around new high-rises and
lowering rents.  
Mayor Kou noted that Mr. O’Neil was speaking about the Freeman-White paper, and while
rents went down, the lower income groups were displaced. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Council Member Lythcott-Haims inquired how his goals for improving City processes could be
accomplished.  
Scott O’Neil noted the differences in how Palo Alto and a city like Redwood City operated
needed to be investigated and that City planners, etc., needed to be involved in discussions. He
gave an example of reducing time for lengthy re-entitlement processes that were needed for
basically every project.  
Council Member Veenker queried as to how the HOA Board got a good representation of
residents, what was done if there was differing of opinion on the Board, and how they made
sure all different perspectives were represented to reach consensus.  
Scott O’Neil voiced the Board was very consensus driven, had very few split votes, and did not
often meet controversy. They encouraged participation from the community. They had open
and honest conversations. He spoke of suing the developer being difficult. As for different
perspectives being represented and reaching consensus, everyone was heard. He spoke of
installing security cameras and there being privacy concerns, and they tried to be respectful
and responsive in balancing all concerns.  
Council Member Burt queried as to his thoughts regarding allowed density of housing in R1
zoned neighborhoods.  
Scott O’Neil thought it would depend on the neighborhood. He expressed there were places to
build higher other than R1. He opined that density in certain R1 neighborhoods should be about
six stories and suggested a sound wall be built to address noise from the train.  
Forest Olaf Peterson stated the PTC would allow him to support the Palo Alto City Council. He
worked in research and tech with a PhD from Stanford Engineering and School of Sustainability
where he was an unprecedented four-time named fellow and supervised by a public policy
medical doctor. He held a staff research affiliation and mentored doctoral students. During
COVID, he was a public servant with the Division of Equity and Social Justice. He had taught
courses in planning, law, economy, and integrated technology. He completed post doctorates in
engineering and education. He was a reviewer for three academic journals and had authored 24
peer-reviewed publications, where his research had scored in the top 20% of international civil
engineering research. He invited the Council to review his resume related to public policy, 
including
education, nonprofits, infracture, etc. He held memberships
with the ASTM
Subcommittee on Water Use and planning, environment, and trade associations.  
Mayor Kou questioned how he would handle the issue of turning park space into housing if
brought before him on the PTC. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Forest Olaf Peterson spoke of open space being important and needing to be protected, but
there was also a role for housing. He spoke of policies to protect park space, but with housing
needs, park space could be looked at, but he hoped to never get that question.  
Council Member Lauing inquired how he would use his education and experience to work with
others to create policy.  
Forest Olaf Peterson worked with many in political spheres and had been successful in building
coalitions, which was challenging and was why he became more interested in public policy.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims queried how he would apply his background to transportation
problems.  
Forest Olaf Peterson commented that he had in-depth expertise on large projects, which he
outlined.  
Vice Mayor Stone questioned what he saw as his role in balancing his personal views and
working with the Board to advise the Council.  
Forest Olaf Peterson expressed he enjoyed trying to understand people’ s positions and then
representing those positions. 
Council Member Burt requested his thoughts on location of higher density housing and location
in R1 neighborhoods.  
Forest Olaf Peterson spoke of a certain housing consideration being a problem due to there
being only one rail stop, and he suggested housing be spread across multiple rail stops and
public transportation access points. He specified that he lived in an apartment on California
Avenue and commented why he did not think of it as a high-density area. In concluding, he
remarked that civil engineers were educated in public policy and serving the public at the
forefront and thought PTC would give him the opportunity to provide a service to City Council. 
Alex Comsa spoke of working with the Council during the campaign last year. He was a father
with two attending PAUSD, had 15 years’ experience in local real estate, and had been involved
in the IR process and in projects related to land acquisition, entitling, and selling. He had a good
understanding of real estate and land use, which he believed could be an asset for the City. He
was pro-housing and building to preserve Palo Alto’s character. He was asked by many to get
involved. He was here to serve and be a resource for the City.  
Mayor Kou asked his position on the controversial laws related to dense cities and his thoughts
for proper balance.  
Alex Comsa supported preserving neighborhood character and getting input from all residents
and thought there should be large-scale building where it made sense. He discussed Planning
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
having a lack of resources related to processing individual applications. He discussed possibly
working with Stanford, having retail and family dwellings, and converting parking into mixed
projects. 
Council Member Burt asked if he agreed with the placement of the identified 6,000 sites in the
Housing Element. 
Alex Comsa noted he was not familiar with the developments in the Housing Element over the
last three months. He indicated that hundreds of ADUs and single-family homes would happen
naturally. He would focus on the Research Park, Stanford Shopping Center, and parking lots. He
discussed why he was against building around San Antonio Shopping Center, Costco, and
downtown other than parking lots.  
Council Member Veenker inquired how affordable housing should be incentivized and funded
and asked him to talk about how the City could approach all-affordable developments versus
inclusionary housing. 
Alex Comsa indicated the City lacked in-house resources regarding real estate. He believed
there was an opportunity to partner with Stanford to create half the Housing Element units. To
create affordable housing on a large scale, he believed underutilized City assets had to be
considered. He recalled that a couple years ago a proposal was submitted for converting City-
owned parking lots into housing, which he believed could create a mixed project.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims questioned which state law related to housing most excited
him.  
Alex Comsa stated the Housing Element was prompting cities to act, not react to housing
demand and believed it should be a focus; although, it would be hard to achieve the numbers
without a partnership with Stanford or using the City’s assets. He spoke of SB 9 and 10 not
getting traction. In closing, he was grateful for the opportunity and was here to serve and
hoped his expertise would become a resource for the City.  
Cari Templeton ( Incumbent) had been on the PTC for four years. She spoke of the work they
had done and the collaboration and discussions they had, which she believed provided helpful
input to the Council.  
Vice Mayor Stone queried what drove her to seek another term and what she hoped to
accomplish that she had not been able to in the past.  
Cari Templeton had accomplished what she wanted to with the PTC. They analyzed items, 
asked good questions, and made sure staff and the public had considered an issue before going
to Council, which drove her to reapply. She touched on items that needed to be finished and
thought she had more to contribute.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked her what she thought people did not understand about
PTC issues. 
Cari Templeton thought people did not understand the slow pace of government. She claimed
that patience and understanding perspectives took time and experience. 
Council Member Veenker was intrigued by her reference to the March 2021 discussion by the
PTC. She inquired if it was important to have a range of perspectives around the Commission
table and, if there was not sufficient range, how she would go about getting the views of
unrepresented residents.  
Cari Templeton voiced that every perspective could not be represented on the dais, but there
were public comments, and people were encouraged to participate. It was critically important
to have diversity of opinions and backgrounds on the PTC. Having a variety of perspectives, etc., 
helped in providing information to Council.  
Council Member Burt asked if she agreed with the placement of the identified 6,000 sites in the
Housing Element and if she would support rezoning permitting higher density in certain
neighborhoods. 
Cari Templeton did not want to eliminate R1 zoning and put multiple units on every R1 lot. She
appreciated and spoke of the way it had been done in certain neighborhoods. She thought it
was interesting to think about how to build density while keeping different types of housing. 
Regarding rezoning permitting higher density in certain neighborhoods, she thought there was
room in many neighborhoods for such diversity. She detailed why always doing it according to a
formula was not always best. She thought it was important to have dense spots in more than
one area, and those areas needed to be identified and zoned appropriately. She was not ready
to blanket the whole city and thought there needed to be wise choices. In summary, she hoped
to be reappointed to continue helping Council. 
Historic Resources Board
Christian Pease ( Incumbent) just completed his first term on the HRB, which had been a good
experience. He noted that the changing environment in Palo Alto made it a more important
function than previously. He thought the most important thing to be considered this year and
why he would like to have another term was the inventory for historic resources in Palo Alto, 
which had not been updated in about 20 years. He spoke of information he had learned from
the California Preservation Foundation on the new housing laws, which an accurate inventory
was key to compliance with the laws.  
Council Member Burt inquired how he thought things were working as a Board and if there was
anything City Council could do to enable the HRB to be more effective.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Christian Pease commented that the Board had been in transition and that bringing in other
perspectives
might
help. Everything
presented
to them
was
addressed
through
the
Architectural Review Board and dealt with design issues. He spoke of preservation related to
commercial and residential property being different and being incentivized in different ways. 
He mentioned not having an [ inaudible] Act but stated it may not provide much incentive. He
addressed
why
inventorying
certain
areas
was
important. He
spoke
of there
being
responsibilities and benefits of being on the inventory, which was confusing for folks, and he
believed stakeholder meetings were not the right approach and that complicated questions
needed to be asked.  
Council Member Veenker requested he speak to streamlining approvals and motivating a net
increase in historic resource protections and asked how he suggested resolving tension there.  
Christian Pease indicated that the bedrock of preservation was the Secretary of the Interior’s
Standards, which was understandable but old. He indicated that things which could not be fully
preserved had the most potential, and he outlined standards for that. He referenced emerging
technologies and an industry standards group that could make things easier. He envisioned
building data sets that could be applied in many ways.  
Samantha Joy Rodman had been a resident of Palo Alto for over 22 years. She was a graduate of
Gunn High School and UC Santa Barbara where she obtained a bachelor’ s degree in history. She
had worked with some of Silicon Valley’s respected tech companies for over a decade. She was
pursing her master’ s degree in public history with a specialization in California history. She
resided in a 1926 cottage. She represented the student, small-business, and renting population. 
She was a preservationist and passionate about working with communities and telling their
stories. She had experience in conducting archival research, examining biases, preparing
research reports and presentations, and working with many California preservation programs. 
She wanted to serve on the HRC to preserve the distinct character of the city.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims inquired how the HRB could ensure the decisions of today
would not replicate the inequities of yesterday.  
Samantha Joy Rodman outlined there was an opportunity to ensure they did not replicate prior
inequities. She believed the State had the opportunity to commemorate places and sites that
historically had not been. She thought Palo Alto was due for another historic resources report
and remarked that houses possibly without striking architecture should be protected.  
Vice Mayor Stone queried if she had an opinion regarding the City proactively identifying
houses to be on the historic registry without owner consent.  
Samantha Joy Rodman spoke of houses being misrepresented by listing agents related to
properties possibly being a historically designated property. She supported the City taking a
stance on historic properties and voiced that another inventory would further the cause.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Council Member Burt requested her thoughts on tension between the aspiration for high
density housing and the cottage cluster sites being candidates and the value they provided
being close to market rate affordable in additional to having social values.  
Samantha Joy Rodman did not feel that taking parkland to build multi-tenant housing was the
answer nor was turning cottage courts to higher density housing. She remarked that cottage
courts retained a unique character and were assets.  
Mayor Kou questioned what she thought was missing in historic preservation education and
what more the Commission could do.  
Samantha Joy Rodman would love to see historic walking tours and a partnership with the
Museum of American Heritage and the Palo Alto Museum to make history accessible. As a
public historian, she was dedicated to outreach and education. In concluding, she believed
there needed to be a balance between protecting historic resources while allowing freedom to
owners and believed Palo Alto could be a renowned historic preservation community and
hoped the HRB could forward that.  
Alisa Eagleston- Cieslewicz ( Incumbent) had served on the HRB since early 2022 when she filled
a vacant partial term and was now applying for a full term. She valued the opportunity to serve
the City. Her appreciation for Palo Alto’s history began as a child. She grew up in Palo Alto and
graduated from Gunn High School. She continued her education at Stanford University majoring
in art history and minoring in archeology. She pursued graduate studies in conservation and art
history specializing in the conservation of three-dimensional objects. She also held an MBA
from the Haas School of Business at UC Berkeley. She was the conservator at SFO Museum and
previously held positions at the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco and the Metropolitan
Museum of Art. She had worked as a consultant on architectural preservation projects. Through
her background in conservation, she thought she had a good understanding of many historic
preservation
issues that would come before the Board. She also understood
historic
preservation from a homeowner’ s perspective.  
Vice Mayor Stone asked what she would like to see the City do to get more active in Palo Alto’s
history. 
Alisa Eagleston- Cieslewicz thought the Palo Alto History Museum would be phenomenal, and
she was looking forward to its development and engagement with the community. She claimed
that Palo Alto had a lot of great stories without a centralized venue to tell them and thought
the museum had potential in that regard. Regarding historic preservation, she would like to see
more general outreach in appreciation of historic resources in people’ s day-to-day lives.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked what could be done to draw attention to the past and
tell it more fully. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Alisa Eagleston- Cieslewicz noted that telling a wide variety of stories was imperative, and she
hoped the Palo Alto History Museum would incorporate stories about groups that had not been
included before. She opined that it was essential to incorporate cultural history of sites into
plans and to tell those stories through signage also.  
Council Member Burt was interested in the HRB proposing a broadening of their purview. 
Alisa Eagleston- Cieslewicz thanked Council for the opportunity. She had enjoyed the experience
of serving on the HRB and hoped to continue.  
The Council took a 10-minute break] 
Utilities Advisory Commission
Rachel Croft had been a Palo Alto resident for 12 years and had lived on the Peninsula her
entire life. She studied industrial engineering at Stanford and had an MBA in finance from
University of Pennsylvania at Wharton School. She had been in investment banking for 5 years
followed by 25 years in medical devices in which 12 of those years were focused on behavior
change for health. She had experience in behavior change theories and implementation. She
had become passionate about sustainability in the last few years and wanted to take a personal
role in identifying solutions. She addressed the supply and demand sides of utilities. She felt she
could contribute her experience to motivate and help people adopt sustainable energy and
water usage. She considered herself practical, ethical, and financially adept, so reliability and
fairness in financial impacts would be high considerations as well as her sustainability interest.  
Vice Mayor Stone asked what she saw as the UAC’s role in accomplishing the City’s S/ CAP Plan
and the 80 X 30 goal. 
Rachel Croft had seen the work plan to get to the goals, which a huge part fell on Utilities. She
thought there needed to be concentration on electrifying everything possible, decreasing gas
usage, sustaining the water supply, and where energy would be sourced. She believed incentive
programs played a role.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims inquired how she would apply her experience in motivating
behavior change to try to reach the 80 X 30. 
Rachel Croft discussed her experience in motivating people to quit smoking, which she thought
was relevant to motivating behavior change related to 80 X 30. She noted that there first had to
be a conversation with residents and that they needed to see their data, so advanced metering
was important. Short of having the metering in place, there was data available to help people
make changes and lower costs.  
Council Member Burt queried if she had been following the UAC meetings and how she
envisioned the initiatives she referenced being actualized through the UAC. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Rachel Croft had watched a few UAC meetings and previously reviewed the agendas. She had
not seen agendized items related to incentives, which she thought was important. She also did
not see the AMI work in a packet. It was not easy finding the information, and she was
interested in a dashboard of goals. Asking for presentations from City staff on the progress of
the issues could dovetail with incentives and data. In closing, she stated she was motivated and
would be honored to serve on the Committee. 
Greg Scharff ( Incumbent) had been on the UAC for three years. He had been on the Finance
Committee seven years, on the NCPA eight years, and had been involved in Palo Alto Utility
since about 2010. He thought experience was important in enabling continuity.  
Council Member Burt queried, related to the Resource Management Plan, what he thought the
role of a distributed generation in storage was versus utility scale supplies and storage and
what the City’s approach should be on carbon neutrality. 
Greg Scharff indicated that historically distributed solar and storage within the city did not
make economic sense comparable to doing a power-purchase agreement. He thought putting
up solar in the city would send a message to people but would not solve the issues. He opined
there needed to be less solar and more base resource or a counteraction to solar, such as wind. 
The 24/ 7/365 renewables were aspirational, which he was not implying that could be done, but
he recalled staff having difficulties monitoring it.  
Vice Mayor Stone queried why he wanted to continue serving on the UAC.  
Greg Scharff commented that electrification was being embarked on, but the grid needed to be
updated. He voiced there needed to be fair processes and funding needed to be addressed. He
thought AMI would help in understanding the benefits, and that behavioral change data would
make a difference. He wanted to be on the UAC to keep rates low and to ensure a smooth
transition. He did not want a political disaster. He wanted to move forward in a way that was
not negative but in a way that residents would appreciate.  
Mayor Kou questioned how he saw the natural environment fitting into sustainability and
climate change. 
Greg Scharff expressed that he had seen people moving toward natural plants, less water
usage, etc. He supported planting more trees and protecting the canopy. 
Council Member Lauing asked if there were priorities that Council, the City, or UAC were not
emphasizing that should be. 
Greg Scharff agreed with everything that had gone to Council in the last three years. He opined
that planning electrification, addressing the cost, and preparing the public needed to be the
focus. If the gas utility was going to be shut down, he also felt it was important to determine
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
how that would be done. In summary, he stated he had enjoyed being on the UAC and enjoyed
the challenges. 
Siyi Zhang had been a Midtown resident for over seven years, after she graduated from
Stanford. She was the Lead Product Manager at Lunar Energy and was diligently working to
launch their first home battery system together with the nation’s largest solar installer, Saran. 
She started in the energy field after graduation and was a dedicated technologist. At Tesla she
focused on C& I energy storage, utility scale storage, and AI software. She joined a start-up in EV
charging and helped customers operate their EV charging stations. She was an active
community organizer and was the Director of Marketing at the Volta Foundation, which was a
nonprofit to help advance battery technology. She volunteered with SunWork, which was active
in Palo Alto with the Heat Pump Water Heater Program. She was passionate of the work being
done and thought Utilities needed to be deeply engaged with the transition and DER to help the
customer.  
Mayor Kou asked how she would consider implementing reliable energy. 
Siyi Zhang mentioned that implementing reliable energy should be a mixed approach. She had
the opportunity at Tesla to work on utility solutions. For a resilient grid, she believed energy
needed to be procured from utilities as well as having consumer participation.  
Council Member Burt inquired if she had watched Utility Commission meetings. He wanted her
thoughts on how her experience and vision would fit into a governing role and how she would
motivate fellow commissioners and staff to move forward with issues she thought should be
advanced.   
Siyi Zhang had seen clips from the meetings. She was very imbedded in the technology
landscape and had experience in energy storage, solar, and smart circuits, so she could provide
insight. She would not yet push for procurement of a long-duration storage project without first
addressing technology, a time frame, and the audience being considered.  
Council
Member
Veenker
queried
what
suggestions/ solutions/ approaches
she had for
alleviating the type of situation she had faced with CPAU, as mentioned in her application.  
Siyi Zhang addressed what was blocking it. She noted that the city inspection side may be
lacking information regarding technology; therefore, the Utility Commission could more involve
the Building Permit Department. She remarked that the right stakeholders should be invited.  
Mayor Kou questioned if she could commit to the time required for the UAC.  
Siyi Zhang explained that she could commit to the time required. It was her mission and career
goal. She wanted to make things happen. In concluding, she stated she wanted to leverage her
industry and technical experience to help residents transition to a more sustainable future; 
make programs accessible to all customers, not just homeowners; bring the right technology to
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
the city; make sure the right benchmarks would be used for energy consumption/ efficiency; 
and use her product background to improve the customer experience. She remarked that there
were many ways she could contribute to the Commission.  
Natalie Geise had a bachelor’ s degree in chemistry from West Virginia University and earned
her PhD at Stanford working at SLAC, the DOE National Lab related to battery and energy
storage materials and their degradation. After graduation, she was employed by Powerhouse, 
an innovation consulting firm that worked with utilities, etc., looking for start-ups in clean
energy. She understood program and rate design, project development, and other issues
related to energy, water, and sustainability. She was excited to possibly lend some of her
experience to the UAC. 
Mayor Kou questioned where natural environment fell into sustainability. 
Natalie Geise commented on the water utility aspect of natural resources that needs to nurture
the natural environment as well as provide water to homes and plant life. She specified that
park space was needed.  
Vice Mayor Stone requested that she speak about the PhD program at Stanford and how it
would relate to the UAC. 
Natalie Geise was a chemistry PhD student and looked at battery materials, next generation
solar facilities, long-duration energy storage, and EVs, which she explained was less relevant to
the UAC versus something like a BPA procurement. She spoke of SLAC and using facilities to
pinpoint degradation modes in different materials, which tied it to overall efficiencies. During
her time there, she served on the User Executive Committee for the user facility, which looked
at long-range planning of their facilities, what users needed, and the capabilities needed in the
next 10 years. She was exposed to different energy technologies at the DOE, which was why
she wanted this role in translating technologies, looking at innovation and getting it to a
market. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked what kind of experience she had in translating the
scientific necessities to people not as experienced as she but whose cooperation was required.  
Natalie Geise expressed not everyone’ s priority would be decarbonization. She noted that
utility bills and reliability were high priorities for many, which needed to be balanced with
sustainability goals, and behavioral changes needed to be discussed, which could include
financial tools. To gain acceptance by the consumer, she noted that it was important they have
Project designs and data.  
Council Member Veenker requested she address what she did as cofounder and leader of The
Chemistry Association in the Interest of Minority Students and her values with respect to
serving the interest of equity on the UAC.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Natalie Geise explained that the program was within the Chemistry Department, and they ran
programs, had independent meetings of themselves so students could have a community, and
they had seminars. Twenty percent of students in the department signed up for some
programming and 80 to 100 individuals attended the seminar at the end of the year. Related to
equity and more broadly, she had taken a course on racial equity in energy, which related to
looking at financial tools that could give people the ability to transition.  
Council Member Burt inquired if she thought demand management was a key part of the
modernization and how she would go about moving staff toward a complementary approach.  
Natalie Geise understood the demand management programs allowed upgrades to be put off, 
which sounded like a good investment to provide more control over the grid than currently
existed. She mentioned bringing some of those insights and guidance into where to look and
how to think about what can be declined as a trade-off.  
Bob Wenzlau was interested in bringing capacity in the area of water resources to the UAC. He
addressed water being a core element and had judged there was not a focus or engagement
related to water. He served on the Stormwater Advisory Commission and wanted to introduce
more consideration of a resource-based organizational
model to water and energy. He
observed much interest as to the volume of water but questioned if there had been enough
attention to water quality. He was excited to have heard from younger applicants.  
Council Member Burt queried as to his perspectives on the energy transformation issues and
the relationship for the needed grid transformation.  
Bob Wenzlau did not have perspectives to the depth of the UAC. He supported hot water heat
pump conversion on the S/ CAP. The prospective he brought was to organize by appliance
category rather than focusing on a whole-house model. He offered skills in being able to
observe patterns and contribute organizational structure to those types of initiatives.  
Mayor Kou questioned how he saw sustainability fitting into the natural environment. She
stated the carbon footprints and the delivery of biowaste needed to be measured and views
needed to be examined birth to grave.  
Bob Wenzlau
spoke about Measure
E and parkland
balancing
in with the need for
infrastructure. He opined that within an urban environment, sustainability required land. He
was torn with the environmental justice concerns of natural land versus land needed so the
climate impact could be lower, and stated care should be taken in not creating a false view of
pristine nature. The Council and the community needed to be sensitive to the environmental
justice issue. He spoke of his work with solid waste management and indicated that he had
previously brought to Council’ s attention the huge climate footprint related sending paper
overseas. Cradle to grave had been his motto, and he hoped to always contribute the true
carbon footprint in all decisions made. In closing, he thought it was important for the UAC to
focus more on water. He observed that there was not a water skill base on the UAC. He alleged
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
that work needed to be done to balance out the water issues with the one-water strategy. As
for climate, he was very interested in the interchange between water and power. He
mentioned it was important for the community to examine what could be done in terms of
generating local water resources and storage strategies and to focus on enhancing water
quality. He hoped he had, at least, brought thoughts for Council this evening.  
Jason Titus was interested in the UAC because of significant need of transformation and
transition across most of what the UAC oversaw – energy, water, solid waste. He discussed
doing that with reliable service. He felt he could bring skills to the UAC. He had experience
working in organizations to make shifts and transitions. He spoke of his time at Yahoo Mail
related to goals, metrics, technology, etc. He had been in Palo Alto for over 20 years. He spoke
of installing solar and there being challenges with vendors and cost. He discussed his time on
the Comprehensive Plan Committee years ago. He spoke of priorities to address transitioning to
renewable energy, electrification, and water usage.  
Council Member Burt asked if he had been following the UAC and if the Commission should be
more aggressive regarding various areas of the UAC’s scope.  
Jason Titus affirmed he had watched a number of meetings and had taken part in some of the
Sustainability Subcommittee meetings. He mentioned he had seen some improvements in
metrics, etc. He discussed demand management, prioritizing, and efficacy.  
Council Member Lauing asked him what differentiated him from the other candidates.  
Jason Titus answered that he would bring experience of assembling different parties, vendors, 
customers, etc., to understand motivations and align them. He spoke of his experience at
Google in running the developer ecosystem. He thought residents were not clear as to how to
transition.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims requested he give an example of his arguments when being on
a body that did not agree with him.   
Jason Titus described being VP of Engineering at Google, where most were engineering majors, 
and he studied philosophy and political science, which related to his people skills. In summary, 
he specified he had quit his job a year ago to focus on climate change. Full transparency: part of
what that entails is investing in heat pump companies, deep geothermal drilling, etc., 
personally, and he was advising start-ups. He understood the dynamics involved in committees
dealing with overhead work.  
Max Rayner had an education in computer science and systems engineering and an MBA in
finance. By trade, he co-owned a management consultancy focusing on hospitality and travel all
over the world. His trade was to solve problems for clients. He had been in Palo Alto since 2009
and before that in Mountain View. He applied because he thought it was time to contribute.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Mayor Kou queried, with regard to Measure L, how he would address utility rates and the
hiding of a secret tax by using excessive charges and asked if he had been following the UAC, 
Finance Committee, and Council meetings regarding this topic. 
Max Rayner voiced that good governance was about well-informed citizenry, so he found that
to be a mistake, and he would have flagged it as a problem. It appeared that the policy put
forth was middling deceptive, and he found it objectionable. He had sporadically followed the
meetings and noted he was not an expert.  
Council Member Burt asked him what was deceptive and not transparent about Measure L.  
Max Rayner understood that surplus from utilities charges was recycled for general City
purposes, which he did not find transparent. He asked to be informed if his understanding was
incorrect. He opined that it was not transparent because he did not believe the majority of
citizens knew of a hidden tax. He defined a hidden tax in economic terms.  
Mayor Kou questioned if the natural environment should be part of the solution for addressing
climate change and how he would ensure utility rates would be reasonable and not excessive.  
Max Rayner addressed technology, people having a concern for the natural environment, there
being less than complete cooperation between Planning and Utilities, and the difficulties for
consumers. Regarding utility rates, transfer costs and needed future capital investments should
be considered. He provided a personal experience related to possible improvements regarding
the Commission in cooperation with other parts of town administration.  
Council Member Burt questioned if he was aware that the increase in panel sizes was triggering
a crisis in the ability to accommodate electrification, which triggered transformer upgrades; if
he understood why panels were not to be greater than the need; and if he thought Measure L
was not transparent even with there being community debates, editorials, etc. 
Max Rayner discussed upgrading and future benefits. He indicated why he not think Measure L
was transparent. 
Robert Phillips had been a resident of Palo Alto since 1982. He appreciated the general
reliability and reasonable cost of the utilities and the work of staff and crews. He had a PhD in
management
science and engineering from Stanford University. His career had been in
analytics and data for government agencies and companies. He was a consultant many years
ago and worked with multiple electric utilities on planning and pricing in the U.S., U.K., and
South Korea; a lecturer and senior scientist at Stanford; professor at Columbia University
Business School; head of Marketplace Data Science for Uber; and head of Pricing Analytics for
Amazon. He indicated the linking concept was his passion for systems combining technical, 
environment, human, and economic points of views and thought the UAC was a great forum for
doing that.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Mayor Kou questioned how he used his mathematical background in his work of price
optimization. 
Robert Phillips explained that most of his work with electric power involved planning, 
scheduling generating capacity, design, etc.  
Council Member Burt asked how his professional background would translate to the UAC and to
what degree he understood the relationship between level of grid transformation and load
management measures.  
Robert Phillips commented there was a need to transform the grid to accommodate local
sources of power, particularly solar, while maintaining reliability. He would like to see
community education regarding metering, charging, etc. He had not entirely looked at the
transformation of the grid. He addressed power from wind and solar.  
Council Member Veenker asked for his opinion related to the pricing profiles during the utilities
transition. 
Robert Phillips discussed pricing being a problem for the City, which needed to be recognized, 
and he had not heard it directly recognized.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims inquired if there was a natural point for the consumer to
realize the need to electrify and how the City might manage that. 
Robert Phillips noted that high gas prices triggered people to think about electrification, which
would be a heavy-handed way of doing it, and the least affluent needed to be considered, 
which may include going beyond the UAC. In concluding, he believed in goals of providing
reliable and low-cost service with long-term sustainability and minimizing environmental
impacts. He could contribute to reaching goals. He thought utilities costs needed to be
considered. He looked forward to working with Council, etc., in these challenges.  
Benjamin Piiru was a Bay Area native who had been in Palo Alto since August 2022. He went to
Berkeley for undergrad, majored in English and minored in math. The first 10 years of his career
was in energy policy. He had been a junior advisor to a commissioner on the California PUC. At
Southern California Edison, he focused on infrastructure policy and solar interconnection
process. He then worked for a solar company doing interconnection policy. He explained
interconnection being related to solar. He then went to law school and focused on energy
regulation and law, environmental law and policy, and climate change law and policy. His
internships were energy focused, and coursework was energy policy minded. After graduation, 
he worked for a company doing energy efficiency policy. He was currently the Director of Grid
Innovation at a solar company related to interconnection and working with utilities and
regulators across the country.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Council Member Burt requested insight as to how he would translate his experience to address
working with other agencies, grid modernization and capacity, the issues faced, and mitigation
of demand through smarter systems, etc., in local distribution and generation.  
Benjamin Piiru stated he was now working in the Northeast, and they had the same issues as
Palo Alto. There were lessons learned that could be brought to Palo Alto from all over the
country. He thought distributed generation, energy efficiency, and demand management
should be explored. He addressed the opportunity to get renewable developers through
incentives
and having the right regulatory
framework. He thought
there were
many
opportunities to achieve Palo Alto’s goals. 
Council Member Veenker inquired if his work at Nexamp was within California or other entities
governing or interacting with Palo Alto Utilities. 
Benjamin Piiru noted his work at Nexamp did not include California. He felt learnings from his
work would translate to the UAC. With him listening to different perspectives from different
states, he could bring lessons learned and what might be working elsewhere. He commented
how his work in relationship development would be helpful, and he believed in finding
consensus.  
Council Member Lauing inquired as to what he could do to upgrade the grid. 
Benjamin Piiru remarked that renewable resource developers were interested in a place with
the correct regulatory framework, low cost to interconnect, etc. He touched on grid-enhancing
technologies that could prevent costly upgrades.  
Greg Hood mentioned that he brought a basic conversation regarding energy. He had been a
contractor for over 45 years, licensed in California since 1993. He attended Berkeley and
received a master’s in construction engineering and management. He had had many projects, 
including having been the electrical project manager for the spillway at Folsom Dan and had
been involved in a DARPA project at Fort Irwin and eventually went to Afghanistan as part of
the project. He was applying because he lived in Palo Alto. He commended Council and the
Commission in this being one of the few truly public utilities. He voiced why he thought the
conversation around natural gas was interesting and discussed how it related to hydrogen. He
had not heard conversation about microreactors, which he thought worthy of consideration. He
claimed the challenge was storing power, not sourcing power. Privatization did not excite him. 
He thought all would come down to revenue. He noted there were many issues to address in
this appointment, such as water, waste disposal, etc. He would be honored to serve the
community. 
Vice Mayor Stone asked how he saw his background as a contractor informing his work on the
UAC. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Greg Hood stated he was also an electrical contractor. He could discuss implementing systems, 
such as AMI, as an example.  
Mayor Kou requested he share his experience when contacted to put in a heat pump water
heater and asked where the natural environment fit into sustainability and climate change.  
Greg Hood noted price was an issue. He experienced the Building Department being supportive, 
which was important. He spoke of the importance of having a consultant before installation. 
Regarding the natural environment fitting into sustainability and climate change, he addressed
his concern with the water treatment plant and the challenges with protecting watersheds, 
open space, and marshland. In closing, he thanked Council for the opportunity. He welcomed
being part of the Commission and saw himself offering a different perspective.  
Chris Tucher was new in his interest in the energy future with electricity, battery storage, and
grids. He had deep roots in the community and an interest to serve. He had been in Palo Alto
for 50 years, although he went away to college and worked in Europe for several years with a
U.S. consulting firm. He attended Harvard Business School and had been a reporter in South
Africa and New York City. He returned to Palo Alto in 1995 and had been with Netscape. He had
worked in healthcare and health tech for the last 12 or 15 years. He was now doing consulting
work with grid scale battery company. He coached soccer and moonlighted as a marketing
professor at De Anza College. He was aware that the UAC had a broad purview of utilities, such
as paying for the wastewater facility, gas prices, etc. His key focus was grid modernization, 
which was a challenge, especially related to community acceptance.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims questioned how he would begin conversations with the
community related to the grid.  
Chris Tucher opined that conversations with the community would have to begin with
expressing the benefits of the utility. He noted that Palo Alto Utility pricing was lower than
others and opined there needed to be better communication on bills. He outlined many
challenges with communication. He noted it was the UAC’s job to work through staff.  
Council Member Veenker asked what he would bring to the table if he was advising the Council
and the Board on “building the grid for tomorrow,” which he had referenced in his application.  
Chris Tucher had deep roots in the community and knew a lot of people, and noted it started
with that. He had worked as an executive presenting to Boards and knew about best practices
in board meetings. He expressed that boards needed to work with staff. He had observed ways
to improve relationships with staff, which he explained. He felt that metrics should be front and
center at every meeting to track progress.  
Council Member Lauing queried as to why he wanted to be on the UAC versus other
commissions.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 21 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
Chris Tucher referenced his interest in justice and his passion to have a robust grid, which was a
problem that needed solving.  
Meagan Mauter was a faculty member at Stanford University. She held several appointments, 
including in the Civil and Environmental Engineering Department, where she worked on water
and infrastructure policies, particularly related to water and energy interactions, and in the
Department of Global Environmental Policy where she worked on some of the same topics. She
was the Research Director for the National Alliance for Water Innovation, which was a DOE
energy water hub focusing on sustainability and water reuse. She had a 15- to 20-year career in
the water space and worked closely with water utilities, which had been exciting and fun and
where she had the greatest learnings. It would be an honor for her to contribute to Palo Alto by
serving on the UAC. 
Council Member Burt inquired how great of a grid modernization was needed and in what time
frame and if there were measures that may mitigate demands.  
Meagan Mauter noted there were three pillars for transformation – energy efficiency, grid
modernization and enabling decarbonization solutions through generation and storage, and
energy flexibility broadly and thinking about when and where electricity was consumed – which
needed to be integrated coherently. She did not work specifically on rolling out grid
modernization plans. Her expertise was in how water utilities could help provide flexible loads
to the grid. She was eager to work closely with the Utilities Commissioner and Director to push
forward ongoing efforts and seek understanding for all residents.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims requested she speak about desalination and if it was viable, 
feasible, and affordable, when it might be available, and how she would join the Commission’ s
conversation about desalination.  
Meagan Mauter commented there were about 15 desalination plants in California. She spoke of
the differences in seawater desalination and desalination as a unit process. Her work was
focused on using desalination processes as a tool for water reuse. It would be an honor for her
to work with the UAC and others related to reusing wastewater and evaluating contracts to
understand how it could benefit Palo Alto. 
Mayor Kou asked if she found it feasible to find federal funding for the transition to clean
energy. 
Meagan Mauter noted that the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act had several features
focused on providing support for utilities in advancing a water infrastructure and the Inflation
Reduction Act addressed energy policy. She was more familiar with the water elements than
the energy elements of those bills but she was eager to work with the UAC to understand how
to access those resources effectively. In summary, she noted she had technical expertise in
water reuse, energy/ water system integration, and decarbonization of the water sector. She did
not know particularly about some of the other aspects of the UAC, but she was eager to learn. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 22 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
In addition to bringing technical expertise, she brought expertise in working on committees and
experience in collaborating with utility operators, which she would be committed to building
that relationship. She would also bring humility to the Committee. She understood when
decisions crossed from a technical to a policy realm. She saw the UAC as advising on the
technical elements and bringing the political decisions to Council. 
Mayor Kou appreciated that humility included understanding affordability. 
Claude Ezran believed he had skills to be a strong contributor to the UAC. He was not a
specialist in a specific field but was a well-rounded individual with depth in critical areas. He
was motivated to be part of the UAC and had time to do it being retired. He had a master’s in
science in electrical engineering and had learned a lot about energy, electricity generation, 
transport, and other technicalities, so he understood what the UAC and Utilities were doing. He
also had an MBA. He had worked in corporate finance at Intel, so he was comfortable with
financial statements, etc. He had been on the HRC for six years and had been selected by his
peers as Vice Chair and Chair and worked in collaboration with peers. He had worked in green
energy with a fuel cell company. He was involved in the community and had been for many
years.  
Vice Mayor Stone asked how his experience on the HRC would apply to the UAC. 
Claude Ezran understood how commissions worked, how to work with the City and the
community, and how to deal with important issues, and there had been relationships with
nonprofit organizations.  
Mayor Kou inquired of ways he thought the electric utility could be more reliable; how utility
rates increasing could be mitigated as certain utilities had less usage; and where he saw the
natural environment fitting in to sustainability and climate change. 
Claude Ezran noted that reliability was a concern. He addressed many things causing outages. 
Undergrounding
could
be
considered. He believed
transformer
failure
needed
to be
investigated and weak links identified. He provided an example of utility rates increasing due to
certain utilities having less usage and stated having plans for reserves to address that was key. 
As for the natural environment fitting in to sustainability and climate change, he opined that
the City was doing the right thing in the conversion of gas to electricity. He noted that City
Utilities could better show the financial aspects for customers.  
Council Member Burt addressed the City subsidized heat pump water heaters program being
similar to what Claude Ezran had discussed. The next challenge was having something similar
on furnaces. 
Claude Ezran suggested providing the community information early in the process. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 23 of 23
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 3/31/2023
City Clerk Lesley Milton declared the remaining two Board interviews were scheduled for April
24. On Monday, April 3, the Council would vote on the candidates interviewed today.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked about the wellbeing of Council Member Tanaka as he
was absent. 
City Clerk Milton would follow up with him.  
ADJOURNMENT The meeting was adjourned at 8:15 p.m. 
