CITY COUNCIL RETREAT 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 17 
Special Meeting 
January 30, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 9:00 A.M. 
Participating Remotely:  Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Welcome From Mayor DuBois - Review Agenda 
Mayor DuBois noted the stress that COVID-19 caused in 2020 and hoped 
2021 was going to be a year of renewal and recovery.  He asked Council 
Members to be open, actively listen to one another, and try to forge a new 
path for 2021.  The purpose of the Retreat was to identify a small set of 
Priorities above the day-to-day workplan.   
Mary Egan, CEO of MRG, reviewed the Agenda. 
Council Introductions – “Why We Serve” 
Ms. Egan asked Council Members to share the reasons they chose to serve 
the citizens of Palo Alto and their hopes and expectations for 2021.   
Council Member Tanaka advised that he chose to serve because of the 
amazing people in Palo Alto.  He owned a home in Palo Alto.  His children 
attended school in Palo Alto.  He loved the weather in Palo Alto.  He wanted 
to ensure the City was a great place to live and work and continued to be 
the center of technology.  His hoped Palo Alto remained a highly desired 
place to live and work and Palo Alto Unified School District (PAUSD) 
remained strong.   
Council Member Stone shared a photo of himself on his first day of 
kindergarten at Duveneck Elementary School.  He grew up and worked in 
the community.  Palo Alto was all about community.  As a teacher and 
renter, he understood the struggles of many residents.  The Council needed 
to represent all segments of the population.  Unity was critical for progress 
and recovery. 
Council Member Kou advised that her experiences as a volleyball coach, 
Parent Teacher Association (PTA) volunteer, and Barron Park Association and 
emergency preparedness leader connected her to residents.  She actively 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
listened to and engaged residents.  She was encouraged to run for the 
Council because residents were frustrated by the approval of large 
developments without consideration of the cumulative impacts.  The City's 
Organizational Chart demonstrated that the Council served Palo Alto 
residents.  She hoped the community looked beyond words to address 
inequalities in 2021.   
Council Member Filseth remarked that the City took care of the tasks that 
residents did not want to do.  Citizens hired the Council to take care of 
problems.  He believed in public service, and his career provided the 
flexibility for him to serve the public.  He hoped to return to executing the 
Comprehensive Plan in 2021, finish the Infrastructure Plan, and match long-
term expenses with long-term revenues.   
Council Member Cormack indicated she chose to run for the Council because 
of a profound appreciation for the service of Council Members.  Her hopes 
for 2021 included health, openness, patience, and empathy while her 
expectations included change. 
Vice Mayor Burt advised that he learned public service from his parents and 
wanted to see the community continue to make progress and improve.  He 
viewed 2021 as a fresh start and an opportunity to make things better.   
Mayor DuBois related that his parents and community taught him about 
public service, giving back, rights, and responsibilities.  He shared photos of 
childhood activities that instilled these values in him.  His hopes for 2021 
were recovery and fun. 
Governing in a Disruptive Environment – John Nalbandian, PhD  
Mayor DuBois introduced Dr. John Nalbandian as a college professor, former 
Mayor and Council Member, and a gardener.  He noted Dr. Nalbandian's 
commitment to public good and good governance. 
John Nalbandian, Professor Emeritus in Public Affairs and Administration at 
the University of Kansas, advised that disruptive forces were inevitable, but 
reconciliation required intention.  He shared survey responses regarding 
national politics filtering into local government, state-local relationships, 
technology and social media, social issues, and change and community 
identity.  Change impacted identity and widened the gap between political 
acceptability and operational sustainability.  As the gap widened, leadership 
challenges emerged, and the paths to reconciliation were bridge-building 
roles and responsibilities, networked problem-solving structures, and 
engagement processes in the community and the organization.  Hopefully, 
reconciliation resulted in more resilience and a sense of community for all.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
Change 
and 
resistance 
were 
categorized 
as 
self-initiated 
and/or 
substitutional, significant but built on one's past, and challenge to an identity 
anchored in the past.  Political campaigns were based on taking elements 
from the past and building on them for the future.  The most important 
element of a message was the readiness of the audience to receive the 
message.   
Mayor DuBois reiterated what Dr. Nalbandian stated and asked whether or 
not there are abrupt or large changes that occur all at once. 
Dr. Nalbandian confirmed that there are large changes that occur all at once.   
Ms. Egan noted the driving forces were national politics, technology, and 
social issues.  She inquired whether there was evidence of one or more of 
those forces influencing Palo Alto and whether affordable housing was one of 
the forces. 
Vice Mayor Burt believed there was community consensus that housing 
affordability was a great challenge for the City and the Region, but there was 
disparity regarding the causes, the recipients, and the remedies.  Over the 
past 30 years, Silicon Valley's economy grew, but individuals' financial 
wellbeing declined.  Government needed to adjust its priorities and attempt 
to return to a sustainable path. 
Dr. Nalbandian asked if issues of identity were apparent in Vice Mayor Burt's 
comments.   
Council Member Filseth suggested an hourglass was a good analogy.  The 
operational issues for attacking problems were quite different from the 
political discourse about the problems. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, indicated there was a perception of winners and 
losers in each of the driving forces.  Providing affordable housing often 
resulted in perceptions of winners and losers.   
Dr. Nalbandian explained that a community was not built on the concept of 
winners and losers.  People did not invest in a community when politics was 
about winners and losers.  The national politics of winners and losers was 
filtering down to communities and affected the ability of community 
members to bridge the gap between challenges and sustainable solutions.  
The Council's role was building a sense of community.   
Council Member Cormack remarked that national politics had trickled down 
to the local level in terms of factionalism.  Perhaps the Council wished to 
review Congresswoman Eshoo's proposed changes to the Congressional oath 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
of office and consider similar changes.  Technology in the public sector was 
not funded the same as technology in the private sector.  The public sector 
continually under-funded technology.  Consequently, local governments 
were not able to pivot quickly.  Traditionally, the Council attempted to 
accumulate fees from market-rate housing developments to fund affordable 
housing.  The need to use a different strategy was possibly causing the 
heated debate around affordable housing.   
Dr. Nalbandian related that acknowledging and dealing with a sense of loss 
was probably more effective than increasing the power of the forces of 
change.  As one dealt with a sense of loss, resistance declined.   
Council took a break at 10:31 A.M. and returned at 10:45 A.M. 
Continue Discussion - Governing in a Disruptive Environment 
Dr. Nalbandian reported as the gap between politically acceptable and 
operationally sustainable increased, the ability to make connections became 
more difficult.  There was a gap for every issue.  There was a bridge for 
every issue, but some bridges were longer and some were wider than 
others.  Some bridges led to nowhere.  One danger was the elected body 
spent so much time working on details that it made Staff's job more difficult 
and essentially yielded the political space to somebody else.  Leadership 
challenges resulted from disruptive forces, and reconciliation occurred 
through roles and responsibilities, structures, or processes filling the gap.  
City boundaries represented a sense of identity, and issues of identity were 
the most challenging issues.  Durable partnerships were important for 
resilience and change.  Public engagement lacked the deliberative process of 
an individual confronting the consequences of his views.  The Council was 
the model of deliberation in the community.   
Vice Mayor Burt remarked that the Council's role was expanding the doable 
category while engaging and empowering the community.  The challenge of 
public engagement was eliciting engagement from all individuals equally.  
The Palo Alto community had a rich history of public engagement.   
Mayor DuBois noted the difficulties of public engagement given the City's 
current financial situation and Staff's ability to work with both allegiant and 
assertive citizens.   
Mr. Shikada inquired regarding the role of the Council and the resources 
needed to fill the politically acceptable space and the usefulness of explicitly 
engaging citizen experts in the politically acceptable space.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
Dr. Nalbandian suggested Mr. Shikada review the International Association 
of Public Participation's (IAP2) spectrum of public engagement and the 
expectations and obligations associated with each phase of the spectrum.  
The ability to identify solutions that were politically acceptable depended 
upon individual Council Members.   
Council Member Cormack expressed interest in Council Members listening to 
one another, matching change to structures that accomplished change, 
considering PAUSD as a durable partner, and determining the precious and 
expendable elements of Palo Alto's history for use in current and future 
issues.   
Council Member Kou appreciated the number of community experts in Palo 
Alto.  Racism did not motivate all decisions and should not be the first 
conclusion.  A view of winners and losers did not build community.   
Council Member Stone concurred with the suggestion to utilize citizen 
experts more explicitly.  Governing was more difficult than campaigning.   
Mayor DuBois stated the framework of the three forces was helpful in 
thinking about the State's reaction to national politics and attempts to solve 
thorny problems with mandates.  Citizens seemed to disagree as to the 
history of affordable housing and not to want to move forward.   
Council Member Filseth suggested the fundamental question was how to 
achieve a cohesive center between political acceptability and operational 
sustainability.  Humans were hardwired to receive a message that they had 
been badly treated compared to everyone else, and that belief reduced the 
ability to achieve a cohesive center.  The right people in the right places 
made an organization work.   
Dr. Nalbandian thanked the Council for the opportunity to view their day-to-
day practices.   
Council took a break at 11:46 A.M. and returned at 12:04 P.M. 
Public Comment for Agenda Item Number 1 
Arnout Boelens, speaking for Elizabeth Greenfield, Ken Joye, Robert Neff, 
Frank Viggiano, and Nicole Zoeller Boelens, encouraged the Council to make 
active transportation a Priority because it supported local businesses, reduced 
traffic congestion, increased parking supply, reduced greenhouse gas 
emissions, and promoted physical and mental health and equity.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
Andy Poggio requested the Council prioritize Fiber to the Premises (FTTP) to 
retain businesses and benefit those working and learning remotely. 
Darlene Yaplee asked the Council to continue focusing on airplane noise 
impacts. 
Steven Levy, Palo Alto Forward, suggested Priorities of expanding housing 
opportunity and affordability, which supported climate change and equity.  
Personally, he supported a measure for a housing affordability bond. 
Terry Holzemer proposed Priorities of economic recovery for businesses and 
residents, housing for households at or below 80-percent average median 
income (AMI), and local control.  He suggested the Council support the Palo 
Alto History Museum. 
Mark Weiss proposed the Council think with different parts of the brain and 
outside the box. 
Aram James suggested the Council pursue internal Police Department 
investigations, a Safe Parking Program, and a reparations commission.  The 
Council needed to follow-up regarding the Downtown Streets Team and 
Foothills Preserve, emphasize transparency and adequate notice of City 
issues, delay a new Public Safety Building (PSB), and allow public criticism of 
government officials. 
Don Jackson supported Priorities of FTTP, decarbonization and electrification, 
and aircraft noise. 
Rob Levitsky urged the Council to revise the Tree Protection Ordinance so 
that trees within a building's footprint were not removed. 
Kevin Ma asked the Council to prioritize housing, social justice, and climate 
change. 
Penny Ellson concurred with Mr. Boelens' and Ms. Zoeller's comments and 
supported Priorities of economic recovery and a sustainable community.  The 
Council approved with record speed a parking garage but delayed bicycle 
and pedestrian projects.   
Loren Smith concurred with FTTP as a Priority. 
Subodh Iyengar encouraged the Council to set airplane noise and FTTP as 
Priorities. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
Kelsey Banes concurred with Priorities of climate change, social justice, and 
affordable housing and suggested the Council locate affordable housing on 
public lands and utilize Measure A funds for affordable housing. 
Rebecca Eisenberg expressed disappointment with the first portion of the 
meeting and the Council's engagement with the community.   
David Coale proposed Priorities of climate change, transportation, and 
housing.   
1. 
Consideration and Selection of 2021 Council Priorities 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported Staff received 523 responses to the 
Community Survey sent to randomly selected households, 119 responses to 
the online Community Survey, and 706 responses to the Open Town Hall 
survey.  Open Town Hall respondents prioritized COVID-19 recovery first, 
transportation second, climate change third, and economic recovery fourth.  
Of the randomly selected households, 40 percent indicated a focus on the 
overall built environment was essential, and 44 percent indicated it was very 
important; 45 percent indicated a focus on the overall quality of the natural 
environment was essential, and 42 percent indicated it was very important.   
Mary Egan, MRG, reviewed the policy for Council Priorities.  The 2020 
Priorities were Housing with an Emphasis on Affordability, Sustainability in 
the Context of the Changing Climate, and Improving Mobility for All.  Staff 
intended to operationalize the selected Priorities into actions, goals and a 
workplan.   
Mr. Shikada explained Staff's development of a workplan based on the 2021 
Priorities using SMARTIE parameters. 
Ms. Egan noted the Council's direction to Staff on January 25, 2021 
regarding the Community and Economic Recovery Workplan and topics 
recommended by the Policy and Services Committee (P&S). 
Vice Mayor Burt indicated topics recommended by P&S and the surveys were 
similar.  His and Council Member Stone's Priorities pertained to economic 
recovery, housing with an emphasis on social and economic balance, social 
justice with a focus on existing efforts and identification of additional efforts, 
and climate change and adaptation.  If climate change was not stopped in 
the next decade, there was a possibility it would be irreversible.  The 
response to the COVID-19 emergency demonstrated the willingness to take 
drastic and necessary actions and the improvement on air quality.  The 
Priorities were interrelated, and initiatives were likely to fulfill more than a 
single Priority.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
Council Member Cormack noted City revenues relied on visitors, and the 
Council had some time to discuss revenue sources and the use of revenues.  
She acknowledged comments about schools, COVID-19 vaccinations, 
airplane noise, Cubberley Community Center, and Fiber to the Premises 
(FTTP).  Her top Priority was COVID-19 recovery.  Social justice was a 
component of all work rather than a Priority.  A Complete Community 
connected housing, transportation, and social justice.   
Council Member Stone concurred with Vice Mayor Burt's comments regarding 
Priorities and Council Member Cormack's comments regarding a Complete 
Community.  COVID-19 and economic recovery was the number one Priority.  
The improvement in air quality that resulted from the Shelter in Place Order 
provided hope for achieving the City's climate goals.  The focus on social 
justice needed to continue.   
Council Member Filseth noted that pre-COVID-19 concerns about the long-
term growth of expenses versus the long-term growth of revenues 
remained.  Whether or not fiscal health was a component of economic 
recovery, it needed to be a focus. 
Council Member Kou believed planning to attract retail and community-
serving businesses and hiring someone with experience in attracting 
businesses were components of economic recovery.  Protecting biodiversity 
was important for recreation, aesthetics, and mental health.  The urban 
forest was important for clean air.  Community health and safety including 
active transportation, remote work, FTTP, and transportation demand 
management (TDM) needed to be a Priority.  Waste, recycling, and 
groundwater were concerns as well.  Social justice policies needed to begin 
with the City.   
Council Member Tanaka explained that Priorities were meant to focus the 
work of the Council and Staff.  He proposed only one Priority of recovery, 
including both COVID-19 and economic recovery.  Revenues were not going 
to return to normal levels overnight or over the next year.   
Mayor DuBois looked forward to receiving statistically representative data 
from the surveys.  His Priorities were COVID-19 recovery first, including 
health, economic recovery for the City, and external recovery; affordable 
housing funding second, including feasible targets; and real movement on 
climate change third, including fire protection, electrification, and metrics.  
He believed social justice was a value and included in affordable housing and 
COVID-19 recovery.   
Vice Mayor Burt indicated actions to focus on COVID-19 recovery and 
economic recovery were basically the same.  Recovery was likely to require 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
five years.  Affordable housing had been a Priority for a few years, but there 
seemed to be an increased consensus in the community regarding affordable 
and workforce housing.  Funding and zoning incentives were necessary to 
achieve that.  Social justice needed a focus of more than six months to 
effect long-term change.  The City needed to make progress on its climate 
goals.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Stone to 
select the following as the 2021 Council Priorities: 
A. 
Economic Recovery 
B. 
Housing for Social and Economic Balance  
C. 
Social Justice 
D. 
Climate Change - Protection and Adaptation 
Council Member Stone felt these areas required continued focus and 
consistency in order to make progress.   
Council Member Kou advised that airplane noise was a part of community 
health and safety, and airplane noise continued to be a huge community 
issue.  She proposed the formation of an ad hoc committee of some sort to 
increase community engagement and address issues.  Perhaps, airplane 
noise was a component of Social Justice. 
Mayor DuBois acknowledged Council Member Tanaka's preference for a 
single Priority, but many economic factors were outside the Council's control.  
Perhaps policies around rental housing were part of Economic Recovery.  The 
Council needed to explore quantifiable programs and SMARTIE goals for 
Climate Change.   
Council Member Cormack related that on January 25, 2021, the Council gave 
Staff a workplan with 20 items, and many of the Priority topics were covered 
in the workplan.   
Mr. Shikada reported Staff's plans to utilize the Council discussion to prepare 
workplan items for each Priority.  Economic Recovery and Climate Change 
were encompassed in the Community and Economic Recovery Workplan.  
Social Justice dovetailed with community wellness and welfare that was part 
of the recovery strategy.  Housing was a continuing major work effort for the 
City because of private-sector proposals.   
Jonathan Lait, Director Planning and Development Services, reported 
housing was going to be a primary focus in 2021 because of the Housing 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
Element Update.  The Working Group was going to be fully engaged in the 
Housing Element Update, and a separate effort was probably going to be 
needed for Housing for Social and Economic Balance. 
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of Housing for Social and 
Economic Balance. 
Vice Mayor Burt explained that it focused the housing program on the most 
difficult part, workforce and low-income housing.  Funding, incentives, and 
zoning were needed for low-income and workforce housing.   
Council Member Kou requested a definition of workforce housing.   
Vice Mayor Burt indicated the Council was going to determine the AMI 
boundaries for workforce and low-income housing.  The City produced the 
least amount of housing for modest-income households.  Without that 
group, the community was not balanced. 
Mayor DuBois clarified the differences between workplan items and Priorities. 
Council Member Stone noted the City was successful in producing market-
rate housing but not low-income housing.  Without strong government 
leadership, low-income housing was not going to be built.   
Council Member Filseth commented that finding funding was implicit in 
Housing for Social and Economic Balance.  The State and Region distributed 
enormous affordable housing targets that were not attainable and did not 
include funding.   
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of Social Justice. 
Vice Mayor Burt reported it was a commitment to continue the focus that 
was referred to P&S in 2020.   
Council Member Cormack believed the work on diversity, equity, and 
inclusion was going to be completed.  She inquired whether Climate Change 
was different from the Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) 
Update. 
Vice Mayor Burt explained that Climate Change included a commitment 
toward an aggressive implementation plan for the 2030 goal and a greater 
emphasis on the necessity for a strong adaptation component. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by 
Council Member Tanaka to establish “COVID-19 and Economic Recovery” as 
the 2021 Council Priority. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
Council Member Cormack stated Staff's day-to-day tasks prevented her from 
adding items to Staff's workplan.   
Council Member Tanaka related that limiting the items helped Staff focus 
and added value to their work.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED:  2-7 Cormack, Tanaka yes 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council took a break at 1:58 P.M. and returned at 2:15 P.M. 
2. 
Discussion and Possible Revision to Council Procedures and Protocols 
Handbook and 2021 Standing Committee Topics  
Mayor DuBois requested Council Members focus on the Council Procedures 
and Protocols Handbook (Handbook) first. 
Council 
Member 
Cormack 
inquired 
regarding 
Minutes 
for 
Standing 
Committees and the Council's interest in lobbying for changes to the Brown 
Act to allow Council Members and/or members of the public to participate 
remotely. 
Beth Minor, City Clerk, reported Action Minutes and Sense Minutes were 
prepared for Standing Committees.  However, the Standing Committees did 
not approve them.  The video recording and Action Minutes were the official 
records of the meetings.  The Action Minutes and excerpts from Sense 
Minutes 
were 
usually 
attached 
to 
Staff 
Reports 
that 
referenced 
recommendations from those Minutes.   
Vice Mayor Burt suggested the Council refer electronic participation and 
quasi-judicial items to the Policy and Services Committee (P&S) and allow 
Council Members to propose revisions to P&S.  The Handbook needed to 
distinguish between procedures and protocols, refer to the City Charter or 
other documents where appropriate, and be rewritten for ease of 
understanding.  The League of California Cities' handbook provided good 
guidance that may be incorporated into the Handbook.   
Mayor DuBois proposed adding the one-hour limit on Staff time, completion 
of the travel expense section, Council Member attendance at Board and 
Commission meetings, and the role of elected officials also appointed to 
other agencies to the items referred to P&S. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Burt to allow 
Council Members to submit to Staff their comments by the end of February 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
2021 regarding the Council Procedures and Protocols, for review and 
discussion by the Policy and Services Committee.  
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that Staff was going to collate the topics 
into a list and submit it to P&S in a public document. 
Ed 
Shikada, 
City 
Manager, 
assumed 
P&S 
intended 
to 
make 
recommendations for the Council. 
Ms. Stump asked Council Members to provide specific revisions, if any. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0  
Mayor DuBois noted the Council Standing Committees were busy, and some 
of the items referred to them were quite old.  Council Member Cormack was 
Chair of the Finance Committee, and Council Member Kou was Chair of P&S. 
Council Member Cormack reported P&S cleaned up some old business in 
2020.  In the last month, Council referred a great deal of important work to 
P&S in addition to audits, diversity and inclusion work, and police reform.  
She reviewed and updated the list of Finance Committee referrals with 
Finance Director Nose.  An affordable housing tax, business tax, and local 
tax ballot measure were priorities for the Finance Committee. 
Council Member Kou proposed P&S work on updating the County of Santa 
Clara (County) PERT and Mobile Community Response Programs in parallel 
with exploring the CAHOOTS Program. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Stone 
to schedule the Policy and Services Committee discussion of the feasibility of 
a CAHOOTS-type program for March 2021. 
Council Member Stone remarked that the topic was too critical to delay work 
for several months. 
Mr. Shikada suggested P&S engage directly with the County.   
Mayor DuBois noted the work was scheduled for May if the County did not 
assign a resource.   
Mr. Shikada advised that the County was working on securing resources, but 
budgetary constraints were an issue.   
Council Member Kou stated the assignment had been pending for quite a 
while.  If Staff reported some progress by the County in March, P&S may 
recommend delaying the CAHOOTS program. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
Mr. Shikada proposed Staff and a member of P&S meet with representatives 
from the Board of Supervisors regarding the PERT and Mobile Community 
Response Programs. 
Council Member Kou agreed to a meeting but wanted to proceed with the 
referral. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Vice Mayor Burt requested the Council review the COVID-19 Safety 
Response Program for employees under the COVID-19 recovery plan. 
Mr. Shikada advised that the Council dealt with that on January 25, 2021, 
and Staff intended to prepare a recommendation for referral to a Standing 
Committee or the Council.   
Vice Mayor Burt noted the topic was time sensitive.  He inquired regarding 
P&S and the Human Relations Commission's (HRC) work on Social Justice.   
Mr. Shikada explained that the HRC's role was integral to a few of the items 
on the Race and Equity Workplan.  The HRC was working on the 21-day 
challenge. 
Chantal Cotton Gains, Deputy City Manager, reported in November 2020, the 
Council retained the Race and Equity Workplan and planned to partner with 
the HRC as needed.   
Council Member Filseth recalled the Council's referral of the Independent 
Police Auditor (IPA) to P&S in November 2020 and requested the status. 
Mayor DuBois noted the IPA was not on the referral list for P&S. 
Mr. Shikada understood the Council directed Staff to work with the IPA to 
prepare a contract amendment for an expanded scope of work. 
Ms. Stump seemed to recall that P&S was to discuss one item. 
Mayor DuBois proposed both items be placed on the P&S referral list as well 
as Staff's workplan. 
Council Member Cormack related that the IPA's oversight of internal 
complaints was contained in the P&S referral list.  The contract amendment 
was part of Staff's work. 
Mayor DuBois felt thresholds for Consent Calendar Items and the Junior 
Museum and Zoo (JMZ) were lower priority items for the Finance Committee.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
He suggested the Council refer the Fiscal Sustainability Workplan from the 
Finance Committee list, Town Hall planning, review of State legislation, and 
use of Stanford University Medical Center (SUMC) funds to P&S. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to 
amend the Committee topics as follows:  
A. 
Finance Committee: 
i. 
Move Item 7 (Fiscal Sustainability Workplan) on the referred 
topics list to the Policy and Services Committee;  
B. 
Policy and Services Committee, to add the following topics: 
i. 
Town Hall planning;  
ii. 
State Bill Advocacy; and 
iii. 
Review use of Stanford Medical Center funds. 
Council Member Cormack advised that an affordable housing tax, a business 
tax, and a tax measure were higher priority items for the Finance 
Committee.  The City did not have funding to address the Fiscal 
Sustainability Workplan.  Review of SUMC funds was more appropriate for 
the Finance Committee. 
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council 
Member Filseth to move Part B. iii. to a new Part. A. ii.  
Council Member Filseth stated review of SUMC funds was appropriate for 
either the Finance Committee or P&S.   
AMENDMENT PASSED:  7-0  
Vice Mayor Burt requested the rationale for referred topics not being placed 
on tentative Agendas.   
Monique Le Conge Ziesenhenne, Assistant City Manager, explained that 
items were delayed in an effort to consolidate Staff's preparation, but Staff 
intended to schedule items in consultation with the Chairs.   
Vice Mayor Burt suggested the affordable housing and transportation item on 
the Finance Committee's referral list include funding.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH CONSENT OF THE MAKER 
AND SECONDER to add to the Motion a new Part A. iii. “Item 3 on the 
referred topics be amended to state ‘affordable housing funding’” 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH CONSENT OF THE MAKER 
AND SECONDER to change the Motion Part B. ii. to state “State Legislative 
and Administrative Advocacy.” 
Vice Mayor Burt reported community volunteers tracked High Speed Rail 
legislation with great success and efficiency.  He encouraged Staff to utilize 
community experts in State bill advocacy. 
Council Member Cormack noted transportation was not part of the affordable 
housing referral to the Finance Committee.  A potential business tax was 
appropriate for transportation, if the Council wished. 
Vice Mayor Burt proposed expanding a business tax to include funding.   
Mayor DuBois indicated the items were intended to be discussed in the 
context of a business tax. 
Vice Mayor Burt wanted to explore all aspects of funding. 
Mayor DuBois advised that funding for grade separations was before the Rail 
Committee. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH CONSENT OF THE MAKER 
AND SECONDER to add to the Motion a new Part B. iii. “Discuss a report on 
Tiers 1-3 of the Safe Parking Program.” 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH CONSENT OF THE MAKER 
AND SECONDER to add to the Motion a new Part B.iv the “Review and 
discussion of proposed amendments to the Tree Protection Ordinance.”  
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
XX to add to the Policy and Services Committee topics to discuss expanding 
the policy for the groundwater protection program. 
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND  
Mr. Shikada noted Staff was preparing a status update regarding the Safe 
Parking Program for the Council, and it was tentatively scheduled for a 
March meeting.  At the current time, Staff was not aware of the issues P&S 
wished to address regarding the Tree Protection Ordinance.  Therefore, a 
meeting with P&S may be necessary prior to preparation of a Staff Report. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
Council Member Kou requested the airplane noise consultant provide a 
presentation to P&S regarding its letter to the Santa Clara/Santa Cruz 
Roundtable and the Council allow P&S to revise the letter, if necessary. 
Mayor DuBois suggested the item was more appropriate for a Colleagues' 
Memo and the consultant provide a report to the Council. 
Mr. Shikada recommended Staff prepare an informational report for the 
Council and urged Council Members to consider Staff's workload. 
Council Member Kou requested a referral of Transportation Demand 
Management (TDM) plans and the Transportation Management Agency 
(TMA) to P&S. 
Mr. Shikada advised that next steps for TDM plans were on Staff's workplan.   
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, reported the Sustainability and 
Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) update was likely to influence TDM policy, which 
Staff intended to review with the Planning and Transportation Commission 
(PTC). 
MOTION AS AMENDED: Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council 
Member Kou to amend the Committee topics as follows:  
A. 
Finance Committee: 
i. 
Move Item 7 (Fiscal Sustainability Workplan) on the referred 
topics list to the Policy and Services Committee  
ii. 
Review use of Stanford Medical Center funds  
iii. 
Item 3 on the referred topics be amended to state “affordable 
housing funding” 
B. 
Policy and Services Committee, to add the following topics: 
i. 
Town Hall planning  
ii. 
State Legislative and Administrative Advocacy 
iii. 
Discuss a report on Tiers 1-3 of the Safe Parking Program  
iv. 
Review and discussion of proposed amendments to the Tree 
Protection Ordinance  
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 17 
City Council Retreat 
Summary Minutes:  01/30/2021 
Retreat Debrief, Take Away, and Next Steps. 
Mary Egan, MRG, requested suggestions for the format of future Council 
Retreats. 
Mayor DuBois asked Council Members to provide their suggestions outside 
the meeting or via email.  He thanked Council Members, Staff, and the 
public for their attention and input.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 3:22 P.M. 
