CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 30 
Special Meeting 
April 19, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Participating Remotely:  Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Special Orders of the Day 
1. 
Presentation by the Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District. 
Karen Holman, Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District (Midpen), 
reported the first 25 years of Midpen's existence focused on land acquisition.  
Midpen preserved more than 65,000 acres of open space in 26 preserves.  
In 2014, voters approved Measure AA, a $300 million general obligation 
bond to support public priorities identified by a broad-based working group.  
Preserves were free and open to the public every day of the year.  Visitation 
increased 88 percent during the beginning of the pandemic.   
Yoriko Kishimoto, Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District, advised that 
the Ravenswood Bay Trail was complete.  The Highway 17 Crossings Project 
linked the Santa Cruz Mountains with ranges to the south.  The preferred 
location was identified, and a biomineral review was underway.  Lehigh 
Quarry presented a mining expansion project to the Santa Clara County 
Board of Supervisors.  The Midpen Board of Directors was concerned about 
the expansion, particularly protecting the scenic easement.   
Brian Malone, Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District, related that the 
Wildland Fire Resiliency Program expanded the number of acres subject to 
fire management and ecosystem resiliency.  The Grazing Program was an 
essential element of the fire program by reducing fuels and preserving 
critically important grasslands on the San Mateo Coast.   
NO ACTION TAKEN 
1A. 
Proclamations Honoring Stanford's NCAA National Champion Women's 
Basketball Team and Head Coach Tara Vanderveer. 
Council Member Cormack read the team Proclamation into the record.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Council Member Filseth read Tara Vanderveer’s Proclamation into the record. 
Council Member Cormack thanked Coach Vanderveer for her service to the 
community and the Olympic team.  The championship was a team effort with 
11 of 12 players participating in the final game.  The Arizona Wildcats played 
a remarkable game.   
Council Member Stone congratulated the team and appreciated a win during 
the pandemic.   
Mayor DuBois thanked Coach Vanderveer and the basketball program for 
working with local basketball teams.   
Council Member Kou noted Coach Vanderveer espoused equity and 
teamwork.  She thanked the team for setting an example and leading with 
sportsmanship.   
Council Member Tanaka congratulated the team and looked forward to 
seeing the players' future accomplishments. 
Vicki Veenker thanked Coach Vanderveer for mentoring young women in the 
community.   
Tara Vanderveer, Stanford Women’s Basketball Coach, thanked the Council 
for the Proclamations.  She was exceedingly proud of the team working 
together all season.   
Anna Wilson appreciated the community's support and was grateful for the 
opportunity to play basketball. 
Ms. Vanderveer hoped to be able to invite the Council to a game next 
season. 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
2. 
Selection of Applicants to Interview for the Human Relations 
Commission, Public Art Commission, Storm Water Management 
Oversight Committee, and the Utilities Advisory Commission. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to interview all candidates. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, noted that there were questions and answers 
regarding Agenda Item Number 4 and an at-places memorandum for Agenda 
Item Number 7.   
Oral Communications 
Sonja Trauss, speaking on behalf of Robin Pugh, Belen Chavez, Kelsey 
Banes, Marie Wolbach, Evan Adams, and Danny Allen, indicated that the 
California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) did 
not delineate rental and owner housing.  She reviewed national vacancy 
rates from the 1950s to 2020.  While the real estate industry preferred a 
vacancy rate of 2 to 4 percent, that was not beneficial to renters. 
Rebecca Eisenberg remarked that an overabundance of housing benefited 
the community and renters.  The City needed to loosen height and parking 
requirements and tax large businesses in order to build more housing. 
Minutes Approval 
3. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the April 5, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to 
approve the Action Minutes for the April 5, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kou to approve Agenda Item Numbers 4 and 5. 
4. 
Approval of: 1) Professional Services Agreement With Blue Rhino 
Studio, Inc. in the Amount of $214,706 for Dinosaur Exhibits for the 
Junior Museum and Zoo (JMZ); 2) Accept a $14,325 Christopher & 
Dana Reeve Foundation Grant for Adult Changing Tables at the JMZ; 
3) Approve a Budget Amendment in the Capital Improvement Fund; 4) 
Resolution 9949 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto 
for 
the 
Final 
Naming 
Recognition 
for 
the 
JMZ” 
; and 5) Approve a License Agreement With Stanford University for 
Research Space at the JMZ. 
5. 
Ordinance 5520 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto for Renovations at Ramos Park (FIRST READING: March 22, 2021 
PASSED 7-0).” 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported Santa Clara County remained in the 
Orange Tier but moving to the Yellow Tier was possible if progress 
continued.  The County of Santa Clara (County) received a significant supply 
of vaccine doses and added thousands of appointments.  A new blog was 
released the prior week to answer questions about the vaccine and provide 
details of vaccination clinics.  COVID-19 testing was scheduled for Tuesdays 
at Michell Park Library, Wednesdays at City Hall, and May 7 and 21, 2021 at 
Mitchell Park Community Center.  A recent blog by Utilities Director 
Batchelor provided details of recent power outages, improvements, and 
staffing.  The Uplift Local check-in was scheduled for April 20, 2021.  
Wellness Wednesdays topics were earthquake preparedness in April 2021, 
mindfulness for teens in May 2021, senior wellness in June 2021, and art 
therapy in July 2021.  The community was encouraged to participate in the 
Budget discussion through a May 6, 2021 Town Hall and the survey 
scheduled for release on May 5, 2021.  Upcoming Agenda Items included 
grade separations on April 26, 2021, Human Relations Commission 
recommendations for Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funding 
on May 3, Housing Element discussion with the Planning and Transportation 
Commission (PTC) on May 10, 2021, and land use items on May 18, 2021. 
Action Items 
6. 
PUBLIC 
HEARING 
/ 
QUASI-JUDICIAL. 
640 
Fairmede 
Avenue 
[20PLN-00203]: Request for Council Approval of a Preliminary Parcel 
Map With Exceptions to Divide an Existing 23,000 Square Foot Parcel 
Into two Approximately 11,500 Square Foot Lots, Larger Than the 
Maximum Allowed by the Zoning Code, to Facilitate Construction of 
two 
new 
Single-family 
Residences. 
Environmental 
Assessment: 
Exempt per California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) 15303 and 
15061(b)(3). Zoning District: R-1 (Single Family Residential). 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, reported the 
applicant requested a parcel map with exceptions, which were required 
because the subdivided parcels were larger than allowed by the single-family 
(R-1) zone for the neighborhood.  The lot contained about 22,000 square 
feet but was too narrow to be divided into three lots.  Staff anticipated a 
single-family home was going to be built on each subdivided lot.  The 
Council needed to make findings for the subdivision and exceptions.   
Mayor DuBois requested Council Members disclose ex parte communications.  
There were none. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Public Hearing opened at 5:57 P.M. 
Michael Ma, Applicant architect, advised that he and the property owner 
were available to answer questions. 
Public Hearing closed at 5:58 P.M. 
Council took a break at 5:58 P.M. and returned at 6:10 P.M. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about the references to gas service in 
Condition of Approval Numbers 20, 21, and 25 when gas service was not 
permitted in new residential construction. 
Mr. Lait indicated Staff needed to review gas service for accessory dwelling 
units (ADU) and agreed to modify the conditions of approval as necessary. 
Council Member Stone requested the definition of "necessary" in Condition of 
Approval Number 2. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that the meaning of "necessary" varied 
depending on context.  The Council could define "necessary" as "convenient 
and appropriate." 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
adopt a Record of Land Use Action (RLUA) approving the request for a 
Preliminary Parcel Map with Exceptions based on findings and subject to 
conditions of approval, and as recommended by the Planning and 
Transportation Commission. 
Mayor DuBois remarked that the proposal did not cause consternation in the 
neighborhood.  The project was located in an area where the average lot 
size was greater than the maximum lot size.  The sizes of the subdivided lots 
were going to align with the typical lot size.   
Council 
Member 
Cormack 
noted 
the 
Planning 
and 
Transportation 
Commission's (PTC) vote to recommend approval.  The Applicant and Staff 
appropriately explained the small discrepancy in lot size. 
Council Member Kou asked if Staff explored subdividing the parcel into more 
than two parcels with the Applicant.  More lots resulted in more single-family 
homes. 
Mr. Lait related that the Applicant was aware of options.  A third lot required 
additional exceptions.  The Applicant determined the number of subdivided 
parcels.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Council Member Kou asked if it was possible for the frontage to 
accommodate three or four subdivided lots. 
Mr. Lait answered that three lots were not possible. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
7. 
City Council Review of the Sustainability and Climate Action Plan 
(S/CAP) Update Report; Provide Feedback on Policy Tools; and 
Direction to Staff to Implement an S/CAP Engagement Strategy for 
Three S/CAP Engagement Tracks That Includes Outreach to Council, 
Commissions, and the Community. 
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director, reported in 2016, the Council adopted 
a goal to reduce the 1990 level of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 80 
percent by 2030 (80 by '30).  For the next stage in developing the 
Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP), Staff proposed focusing on 
technical analysis review and comments, review and feedback on the S/CAP 
climate policies, and development of proposals for shorter-term programs to 
be implemented in 2021 to 2024.  Outreach and engagement were going to 
be aspects of all three focus areas.   
Christine Luong, Management Analyst, advised that in 2019, Palo Alto 
emitted an estimated 482,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent 
(CO2e) from residential, commercial, industrial, transportation, wastewater, 
and municipal sectors.  Compared to 1990, that was a 38.2-percent 
decrease in total community emissions despite a population increase of 23.6 
percent during the same period.  Additional existing emissions sources, such 
as the airport and Caltrain, were added for the first time.  A total of about 
23,000 metric tons of CO2e were added from emission sources not 
previously included.  Because of these additional sources, a direct 
comparison of the current inventory with previous inventories was not 
possible.  To achieve the 80 by '30 goal, Palo Alto had to meet an emissions 
target of approximately 156,000 metric tons of CO2e.  The main sources of 
Palo Alto's greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions were one-third natural gas 
consumption and two-thirds gasoline and diesel fuel.  Road transportation 
represented Palo Alto's largest source of GHG emissions at approximately 65 
percent.  A third of road transportation emissions was caused by residents, a 
third by commuters, and a third by visitors.  The "business as usual" 
forecast for the City was defined as Palo Alto's projected emissions by 2030 
if Staff implemented the policies and plans adopted by the Council as of 
2019 and followed statewide goals and regulations.  Emissions were 
projected to decrease 52 percent in 2030 and 56 percent in 2040 relative to 
1990.  Palo Alto needed to reduce total emissions by 218,000 metric tons of 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
CO2e beyond the business as usual projections.  The goals and key actions 
that Staff analyzed achieved a 72 percent reduction, leaving an 8 percent 
gap.  Staff anticipated conducting additional studies to determine methods 
to close the gap.  Staff forecast achieving a 78-percent reduction by 2035 
and 80 percent by 2036 or 2037 without closing the 8-percent gap.   
Jonathan Abendschein, Assistant Director, Utilities Resources, indicated Staff 
and AECOM modeled the outcomes needed to achieve the 80 by '30 goal.  
The scenario focused on reducing vehicle travel through telecommuting and 
alternative commute modes, expanding electric vehicle (EV) adoption, 
increasing commuter and visitor trips via EVs, and increasing building 
electrification.  Alternative commute and EV programs provided a net 
savings.  The cost of building electrification was lowest for single-family 
space and water heating and commercial rooftop heating, ventilation, and 
cooling (HVAC) units.  Converting gas appliances in single-family residences 
to electric was more expensive but provided other savings.  Other 
commercial and multifamily actions analyzed so far were expensive.  The 
spectrum of tools that achieved climate goals ranged from voluntary market-
driven solutions to government-driven solutions.  Potential short-term 
actions included expanding residential emissions reductions programs to 
promote building and transportation electrification, enhance programs with 
technical assistance, direct installation, incentives, and/or on-bill financing, 
provide additional services to low-income households, assist with certain 
types of business electrification and workplace EV charging, expand 
availability of alternative transportation modes, expand the scope of the 
Transportation Management Association (TMA), and expand Reach Codes.  
Potential mid-term actions included end-of-life mandates to replace gas 
appliances, expansion of bicycle infrastructure, and exploration of more 
impactful policy measures.  Another option was adoption of a carbon 
neutrality goal.   
Mr. Eggleston reviewed Staff's proposals to obtain community input 
regarding the climate action modeling, climate projections for 2030, climate 
policies, and programs that were implemented through 2024.  Staff 
proposed to continue presenting items to the Council, create a Council Ad 
Hoc Committee to assist Staff, or provide status reports to the Finance 
Committee.  Community engagement was possible through the City's 
Boards, Commissions, and Committees, stakeholder-specific roundtables, 
community-driven working groups, community meetings, an online survey, 
and a community summit series.  The proposed timeline for community 
engagement resulted in a final draft of the S/CAP being presented to the 
Council in December 2021 with adoption and California Environmental 
Quality Act (CEQA) review in the spring of 2022.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Council Member Kou requested the specific stakeholder groups Staff planned 
to work with. 
Mr. Eggleston noted the list included large and small businesses, residents, 
realtors, nonprofits, and school-age groups.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager, added that the Council needed to provide some 
direction regarding stakeholders. 
Council Member Kou expressed concern that the list of actions did not 
include the natural environment, trees specifically.   
Mr. Shikada stated the Urban Forest Master Plan was a separate body of 
work.  It was possible to integrate it within the S/CAP. 
Mr. Eggleston explained that Staff did not include that topic because it was 
not controversial and pertained to work already underway. 
Council Member Kou stated there were huge links between the natural 
environment and reducing GHG emissions.  Residents contacted her about 
their inability to find contractors willing to convert electric appliances or 
knowledgeable about the process. 
Mr. Eggleston advised that departments were collaborating to improve the 
permitting process. 
Council Member Kou asked if Staff was going to conduct outreach to building 
contractors.   
Mr. Eggleston believed contractors were an important stakeholder group. 
Vice Mayor Burt requested the scope and necessity for a CEQA analysis. 
Ms. Luong reported the scope included analysis of all of the final goals and 
key actions in the draft S/CAP.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that the definition of CEQA required 
analysis of proposed discretionary actions that could have a significant 
impact on the environment.   
Vice Mayor Burt noted Joint Venture Silicon Valley's initiative to measure 
transportation impacts through gasoline sales.  A reduction in gasoline sales 
was going to be a key metric. 
Mr. Shikada indicated Staff met with representatives about the initiative.  
The metric may fit well in the S/CAP Implementation Plan. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt stated fugitive natural gas emissions were not included in 
the analysis.  He asked if a review of the value and importance of that was 
conducted. 
Mr. Abendschein related that fugitive emissions within the City's boundaries 
were included in the GHG inventory. 
Vice Mayor Burt inquired whether Staff reviewed best practices for low-
carbon construction materials.   
Mr. Eggleston reported Staff received and was reviewing information 
regarding Marin County's program as a possible Reach Code item.  Low-
carbon construction materials did not directly reduce the numbers discussed 
in this Agenda Item.   
John Kelley urged the Council to reaffirm the 80 by '30 goal and to direct 
Staff to develop an aggressive plan to meet that goal and to consider a 
municipal carbon tax.  Short-term approaches included creating meaningful 
subsidies for specific measures and better detection and control of fugitive 
methane emissions.   
Rebecca Eisenberg suggested the Council ask Tesla to donate electric 
shuttles to the City for public transit and locate homes near jobs.  Staff's 
approaches were not going to work.   
Andrea Gara, 350.org, remarked that Staff was going to have to work really 
hard to engage the community.  Many Palo Alto groups were willing to help.  
She hoped the community continued to work toward the City's climate goals. 
Kevin Ma proposed community engagement occur neighborhood by 
neighborhood as current outreach mechanisms were lacking.  Staff needed 
to focus on non-car alternatives to transportation and improvements to 
bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure.   
Dashiell Leeds, Sierra Club, supported incentives for building electrification 
and suggested the Council form a climate advisory group.  Staff needed 
resources to investigate multifamily and commercial electrification retrofits.   
Keith Bennett noted emissions from concrete were not included in the 
inventory or in the proposals to reduce emissions.  Emissions from concrete 
were too significant to ignore. 
Stephen Rosenblum believed the City needed to attack transportation and 
methane as the primary sources of emissions.  The City was not going to 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
reach its goal if business as usual continued.  Incentives and penalties were 
needed.   
David Coale encouraged the Council to move on Staff's recommendations as 
quickly as possible.  Alternative modes of transportation were the cheapest 
way to achieve reductions. 
Bret Andersen remarked that the easiest way to achieve reductions in the 
building side of emissions was to replace gas appliances at the end of their 
lives.  It was possible to reduce the cost by negotiating guaranteed volume 
installations.   
Julia Zeitlin supported the S/CAP and taking bold actions right away.  To 
achieve the 80 by '30 goal, the City needed to implement mandatory 
programs focused on building electrification and EV purchases.  She 
proposed including a wildfire preparedness plan within the natural 
environment section of the S/CAP.   
Gail Price, Palo Alto Forward, supported expansion of building electrification 
opportunities, use of incentives, and additional partnerships to increase EV 
purchases.  The Council needed to identify aggressive funding and 
measurable actions to create a sustainable future for the community. 
Saman de Silva urged the Council to reaffirm the 80 by '30 goal and 
continue to further Palo Alto's environmental progressivism.   
Katie Rueff commented that implementing the S/CAP was going to increase 
the number of biking, walking, and public transit opportunities.  With denser 
housing, residents were going to live closer to services and utilize public 
transit.   
Justine Burt stated the replacement of gas lines meant gas service was 
going to continue for decades into the future.  Money for that project was 
better spent on incentivizing building electrification.  Electric bikes were good 
for running errands around town. 
Olivia Musill noted climate change was the most pressing issue for her 
generation.  She urged the Council to prioritize walking and biking options 
that connected cities and high-density affordable housing near transit. 
Council Member Stone felt it was time for the world to address climate 
change.  It was time for Palo Alto to reclaim its role as regional, state, and 
even national leaders on bold climate change actions.  The City was moving 
in the right direction with Staff's proposals.  There seemed to be a lot of 
legal uncertainty regarding the medium and high-intervention strategies.  He 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
inquired about anticipated roadblocks and legal fees that increased the cost 
of implementing the strategies. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney anticipated the City incurring legal costs to 
evaluate and chart a strategy and mechanisms for priority projects.  The 
Council was likely to find the legal costs manageable over time.  The bigger 
concern was that some of the actions had a medium to high risk of a legal 
challenge.  Potential adverse outcomes were an injunction and a 
requirement for the City to compensate people who were harmed.  Concerns 
varied widely because the proposed actions varied.  Staff needed to evaluate 
a series of rules and requirements as the Council provided priorities and 
details of actions. 
Council Member Cormack remarked that the strategies and cost estimates 
provided some hope.  She inquired about the intent of Palo Alto adopting a 
goal for 2030 rather than 2050. 
Mr. Abendschein explained that at the time it was adopted, the goal was 
viewed as above and beyond the norm.  Recent climate science talked about 
actions needed to hold global warming to 1.5 degrees Centigrade in 
conjunction with carbon neutrality actions. 
Council Member Cormack asked if 80 by '30 continued to be the right goal. 
Mr. Abendschein noted uncertainty about the number needed to achieve 
specific outcomes.  Clearly, aggressive emissions reductions were needed to 
achieve carbon neutrality, and carbon neutrality was needed before mid-
century.  The 80 by '30 goal was consistent with the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change's pathways to hold global warming to 1.5 degrees 
Centigrade.   
Council Member Cormack inquired about unexpected results from the 
analysis. 
Mr. Eggleston indicated the surprise was learning that all the pathways 
needed to be implemented. 
Mr. Abendschein added that the scale of savings provided by alternative 
modes of travel was stunning.   
Council Member Tanaka supported an aggressive push for micro mobility.  
He inquired about the pilot program for scooter sharing. 
Mr. Shikada suspected that the pandemic prevented the industry from 
moving forward with the pilot program.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Council Member Tanaka noted wind and solar renewables were getting 
cheaper all the time.  He inquired about nuclear energy. 
Mr. Abendschein advised that Staff was not exploring any nuclear projects.  
The State imposed a moratorium on nuclear energy until a federal storage 
facility was built. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if there was a strategy to become more green 
and reduce or eliminate power outages.   
Mr. Shikada referred Council Member Tanaka to the blog by Utilities Director 
Batchelor.  The electric utility's reliability was critically important as 
sustainability planning progressed.   
Council Member Filseth wanted to know what the estimated $750 million was 
going to be spent on and the source of the projected savings. 
Mr. Abendschein indicated most of the funds were going to be spent on 
building electrification, and EVs and alternative commutes provided most of 
the savings through avoided maintenance and gasoline.  Savings were also 
provided by avoided natural gas spending.  For a variety of reasons, natural 
gas rates were expected to increase while electric rates were expected to 
remain stable. 
Council Member Filseth noted that residents who purchased EVs saved the 
money provided by avoided maintenance costs.  He did not understand how 
that amount was applied to the City's savings.   
Mr. Abendschein explained that $740 million was the cost.  There was no 
mention of who paid the cost.  The Staff Report was inaccurate in that the 
$740 million did not include the utility cost.  Utility costs were in the $40 
million to $120 million range.   
Council Member Filseth asked about the legal latitude for the City to use 
natural gas pricing as a price signal to encourage people to consume less 
natural gas. 
Ms. Stump advised that it was subject to legal challenge.  Proposition 26 
constrained the setting of electric and natural gas rates as well as the cross-
sharing of revenues and expenses.   
Council Member Filseth asked if the City was allowed to charge a carbon tax 
on one utility and provide a rebate on the other utility. 
Ms. Stump refused to speculate as the topic was subject to ongoing 
litigation. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Mayor DuBois inquired about the programs needing a CEQA analysis. 
Ms. Stump stated the whole plan needed a CEQA analysis.  It was possible 
to adopt components of the plan under CEQA exceptions.   
Mayor DuBois asked if some of the short-term strategies were allowed 
without a CEQA analysis.  He wanted an explicit statement that the City was 
going to continue to look for options to address multifamily and commercial 
building electrification.  Economies of scale were possible by converting all 
units in a building simultaneously.  The Council may want a policy to align 
programs so that the person who made the payment experienced the 
savings.  He inquired about the concepts of carbon neutrality versus carbon 
reduction and about the City setting a carbon neutral target date. 
Ms. Luong reported benefits of a carbon neutrality goal were utilizing a 
single methodology and being able to compare to a baseline.  A carbon 
reduction goal was embedded within the carbon neutrality goal.   
Vice Mayor Burt remarked that the 80 by '30 goal was going to result in 
significant global warming.  In 2015, an 80 percent reduction was the largest 
reduction that the Council was able to conceive.  A climate leader recently 
stated that a climate protection plan needed a series of different initiatives.  
Climate change was occurring faster than anticipated.  Mega wildfires were 
threats to the economy, public health, and public safety.  The consequences 
of climate change far exceeded the needed investments. 
Council Member Stone commented on the responsibility of providing future 
generations with a planet where they could thrive.  He requested a 
comparison of Palo Alto's gains with other cities' gains. 
Ms. Luong reported the City was doing quite well in comparison to other Bay 
Area cities.  Other cities achieved reductions of 15 percent to 20 percent.   
Council Member Stone inquired about the impact of achieving the City's  
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) targets on GHG goals. 
Sylvia Star-Lack, Transportation Planning Manager, related that the 
provision of housing resulted in lower Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT) per 
person. 
Council Member Stone inquired whether the number of Palo Alto residents 
who worked in Palo Alto was likely to remain constant despite housing 
production or population growth. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Ms. Star-Lack encouraged the Council to view it from a regional perspective.  
Over the region, it was better for people to live near their work. 
Christine Tam, Senior Resource Planner, added that new housing was 
required to have all electric appliances.   
Mr. Abendschein suggested an additional focus on land use may provide 
more clarity.  Staff did not run transportation models for different land use 
assumptions because of the expense.   
Council Member Cormack wanted more information regarding infill housing 
and commuting.  She requested potential details of a municipal carbon tax. 
Mr. Abendschein reported the simplest tax was an increased cost on the use 
of natural gas.  A carbon tax on vehicles was more complicated. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the Council was allowed to tax vehicle 
fuel. 
Ms. Stump advised that Staff did not explore that.  Carbon taxes were 
usually pitched with a great deal of generality.  State and federal laws were 
likely to pre-empt a local ordinance. 
Council Member Cormack stated the actual cost of the externality was not 
built into energy usage.  She inquired whether the data captured air travel 
by Palo Alto residents. 
Ms. Luong answered no.  Air travel was captured in a consumption-based 
inventory that the City did not utilize.   
Council Member Filseth related that RHNA projects were based on adding 
population to the Bay Area.  Nobody had figured out how to add people 
without adding GHG emissions.  The City's targets were based on absolute 
emissions rather than per person emissions 
Council Member Kou inquired about the integration of equity into 
sustainability. 
Mr. Shikada reported specific policies needed to be evaluated in terms of 
unintended social impacts. 
Council Member Kou remarked that population increased, but affordable 
housing production never kept pace with the demand for affordable housing 
because of the jobs multiplier.  Remodeling was a greener use of a building 
than demolition of an existing building and construction of a new building.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
That needed to be tracked.  The City needed to build the community's 
confidence in the electric grid.   
Mayor DuBois expressed concern about Staff responsibility for individual 
strategies.  Some of the strategies needed to begin in 2021.  The electric 
utility needed to champion many of the strategies.  There were many 
community experts in the City, and they had to be leveraged for these 
strategies.  This may be a primary focus for the Utilities Advisory 
Commission (UAC).  Wholesale changes in behavior were going to be huge.  
Staff's strategies were too conservative.   
Vice Mayor Burt indicated 90 percent of the work was reducing the use of 
fossil fuel in transportation and buildings.  A robust and reliable electric 
utility was essential to the whole program.  Staff did not have the bandwidth 
to implement many of the strategies.  Leveraging community experts was 
necessary.  The Council needed to authorize additional expenditures for Staff 
to have dedicated resources focused on the bulk of the strategies.  The 
community was not sold on some of the strategies, and they needed to be 
differentiated.  The community was likely to support a new Palo Alto Green 
program and devoting those resources to the strategies.   
Council Member Filseth believed the Staff Report was clear about the actions 
needed.   
Council Member Cormack felt the community was having a really hard time 
converting to electric appliances.  Regional alignment of standards and 
implementation of basic conversions were going to help.  The Council was 
not able to engage in detailed work on strategies but needed regular 
updates.  An Ad Hoc Committee was not right either.  The Finance 
Committee needed to participate in the work.  A stakeholder group, a Board 
or Commission, or a Blue Ribbon Committee was best able to assist the 
Council with this work.  She recommended the City Manager appoint 
members to the group.  She requested the top two things the City needed to 
advocate for at the State level. 
Mr. Shikada felt it was premature to remark on State advocacy.   
Mr. Abendschein wanted to discuss the issues with the City Attorney and 
conduct additional internal investigations. 
Vice Mayor Burt expressed concern regarding all Boards, Commissions, and 
Committees providing input to the strategies but not taking responsibility for 
implementation.  If Council Members were not the center of a stakeholder 
group, the group was not going to be focused.  The Council Members were 
not domain experts but political leaders for moving this forward.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to: 
A. 
Direct the Mayor to appoint two or more Council Members to lead a 
community stakeholder group of domain experts and community 
activists;  
B. 
Support the policy framework in Attachment A and ask Staff to further 
develop and return to Council as needed with the following changes:  
i. 
A plan for an earlier adoption of commercial electrification 
retrofits;  
ii. 
Evaluation of sale of gasoline within the city limits as a key 
metric;  
iii. 
Evaluation of a best practice standard for low carbon 
construction materials;  
iv. 
A proposal for a Palo Alto Green equivalent voluntary surcharge 
program to help fund electrification initiatives;  
v. 
An evaluation of public health and public safety risk and benefits 
from climate protection;  
vi. 
Move forward with an on-bill financing program for residential 
building electrification;  
vii. 
Evaluate a supplemental carbon neutrality goal; and  
viii. 
Return with recommended electric utility capital and personnel 
investments 
required 
to 
enhance 
reliability 
and 
staffing 
resources necessary for the Climate Action Plan. 
Vice Mayor Burt commented that an on-bill financing program was 
innovative, held a lot of promise, and addressed potential impacts on climate 
change. 
Mayor DuBois did not believe the Council had sufficient time in the meeting 
to address strategies listed in 2021-2024. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change Motion Part B to “Support the policy 
framework in Attachment A and ask Staff to pursue the actions that are 
listed from 2021-2024 and further develop and return to Council as needed.” 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Mayor DuBois liked the proposal for a Palo Alto Green program.  Staff 
needed to interpret the direction as exploring voluntary surcharges.   
Mr. Shikada acknowledged Staff's belief that they needed to do their part to 
advance this program.  Staff was discussing a new performance measure for 
their ability to bring items to the Council.  The Motion overall reflected a 
design-thinking perspective of specific elements with an overall approach 
that involved additional stakeholders in decision-making.  Ideally, the 
subject matter experts and stakeholders were going to help Staff evaluate 
the items in Part B of the Motion and then prioritize the items with existing 
near-term actions.   
Vice Mayor Burt concurred with the suggestion. 
Mayor DuBois noted several of the items in Part B of the Motion were listed 
in Attachment A. 
Ms. Stump advised that if the Council created a body of outside experts, the 
body was going to be subject to the Brown Act.  If the Council created an Ad 
Hoc Committee composed of two Council Members and no outside people 
and empowered the Ad Hoc Committee to consult with small groups or 
individuals as needed in its work, the Ad Hoc Committee was not subject to 
the Brown Act. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change the Motion Part A to “… an ad hoc 
climate action committee that would engage with community stakeholders, 
domain experts, and community activists … .” 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion a new Part B ix “evaluate 
income-qualified incentives to support low income households.” 
Council Member Cormack inquired about the manner in which the Ad Hoc 
Committee reported to Council and reviewed Part B and Attachment A. 
Vice Mayor Burt explained that the Ad Hoc Committee was going to seek the 
input of different community stakeholders, domain experts, and community 
activists in small group settings.  The mission of the Ad Hoc Committee was 
to gather input and make recommendations to the Council. 
Mayor DuBois asked if the Ad Hoc Committee was going to work with Staff to 
refine the S/CAP and return that to Council. 
Vice Mayor Burt replied yes.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Council Member Cormack was more comfortable with forming a Commission 
given the importance of the S/CAP.   
Vice Mayor Burt indicated the Council was allowed to convert the Ad Hoc 
Committee to a Standing Committee at a later time. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion Part B iv “… on power 
utilities … .” 
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of Part B v. 
Vice Mayor Burt explained that floods and wildfires were dimensions of 
climate impacts that were important beyond environmental changes. 
Council Member Cormack asked if a consultant was needed to perform the 
evaluation. 
Mr. Eggleston was not aware of this type of work being done by a 
municipality, but hiring a consultant depended on the level of detail and 
precision needed in the analysis. 
Vice Mayor Burt did not believe the public health impacts of climate change 
were within Staff's expertise.  Community experts were available to help 
with the analysis.   
Council Member Cormack felt the analysis was going to entail a great deal of 
work.  Part B viii was one of the most important elements.  She proposed 
adding to Part B for Staff to evaluate land use and zoning changes that 
reduced GHG emissions. 
Mayor DuBois indicated those changes were not included in the list, even in 
the outer years.  He requested clarification. 
Council Member Cormack reported the work was going to include reducing 
VMT and commute travel. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion a new Part B x “evaluate 
land use and zoning changes that would reduce greenhouse gas emissions.” 
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether the Motion captured his suggestion 
to provide incentives for the purchase of used micro-mobility vehicles.   
Vice Mayor Burt related that Council Member Tanaka's suggestion was 
potentially an initiative in Part B iv and addressed in Part B ix.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Mayor DuBois added that the suggestion was listed in Attachment A. 
Vice Mayor Burt did not wish to predetermine any initiatives, but it was a 
good idea. 
Council Member Kou asked if Part B iii addressed construction and 
demolition. 
Vice Mayor Burt indicated the City had a strong demolition recycling 
program.  Part B iii was in addition to the program.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion Part B x “… and development 
changes.” 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion a new Part B xi “integrate 
urban forestry into the S/CAP policy framework.” 
Mr. Shikada commented that calling out urban forestry was not in and of 
itself a major change.  However, it was symptomatic of the Council 
increasing Staff's workload.  Significant resources were going to be required 
to document the work and organize communication and interaction among 
stakeholders. 
Vice Mayor Burt indicated Parts B iv and viii added resources to accomplish 
the work.  Important elements needed to be included in the Motion. 
Mr. Shikada advised that Staff needed to implement Council direction, help 
the Ad Hoc Committee assess how to involve stakeholders, and create 
documentation for the Council as a whole.   
Council Member Filseth supported Part A.  Part B included a lot of good stuff, 
but Staff's capacity was not sufficient for all of it.   
Vice Mayor Burt clarified that as much work as possible was to be 
outsourced to domain experts in the community. 
Council Member Filseth asked how the Ad Hoc Committee was to report to 
the Council. 
Vice Mayor Burt advised that the former Rail Ad Hoc Committee reported to 
the Council periodically, when there was substantive progress, or when it 
needed Council's guidance, authorization, or endorsement.  The Climate 
Action Ad Hoc Committee was going to work the same way. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion Part A “and that the 
committee would periodically report back to Council.” 
Council Member Filseth hoped the Budget included funding for this effort. 
Council Member Tanaka requested Staff's opinion of the items they were 
likely to accomplish. 
Mr. Shikada answered establish an Ad Hoc Committee.  Staff needed help 
identifying subject matter experts who were willing to work on Part B and 
identify gaps. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether prioritization of items in Part B was 
going to help Staff. 
Vice Mayor Burt indicated prioritization was part of the process.   
Mr. Shikada reported acknowledging the work as the start of a process 
would be helpful.   
Vice Mayor Burt reiterated that Part A and Parts B iv and viii added resources 
for Staff. 
Mr. Shikada indicated that the work was likely to require six to nine months. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Mayor 
DuBois to: 
A. 
Direct the Mayor to appoint two or more Council Members to an ad hoc 
climate action committee that would engage with community 
stakeholders, domain experts, and community activists; and that the 
committee would periodically report back to Council; 
B. 
Support the policy framework in Attachment A and ask Staff to pursue 
the actions that are listed from 2021-2024 and further develop and 
return to Council as needed with the following changes:  
i. 
A plan for an earlier adoption of commercial electrification 
retrofits;  
ii. 
Evaluation of sale of gasoline within the city limits as a key 
metric; 
iii. 
Evaluation of a best practice standard for low carbon 
construction materials; 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
iv. 
A proposal for a Palo Alto Green equivalent voluntary surcharge 
program on power utilities to help fund electrification initiatives; 
v. 
An evaluation of public health and public safety risk and benefits 
from climate protection; 
vi. 
Move forward with an on-bill financing program for residential 
building electrification; 
vii. 
Evaluate a supplemental carbon neutrality goal;  
viii. 
Return with recommended electric utility capital and personnel 
investments 
required 
to 
enhance 
reliability 
and 
staffing 
resources necessary for the Climate Action Plan; 
ix. 
Evaluate income qualified incentives to support low income 
households; 
x. 
Evaluate land use, zoning, and development changes that would 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions; and 
xi. 
Integrate urban forestry into the S/CAP policy framework 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0  
Council took a break at 9:43 P.M. and returned at 9:55 P.M. 
8. 
Consideration of Actions and Direction to Support Community and 
Economic Recovery by: 1) Adoption of a Resolution to Extend the City 
Manager's Authority to Close Portions of University Avenue, California 
Avenue, and Surrounding Streets for the Uplift Local Streets Program 
Until September 7, 2021; and 2) Provide Direction to Staff on the 
Extension, Discontinuance, or Efforts to Develop a Permanent Parklet 
Program. 
Rachel Tanner, Planning and Development Services Assistant Director, 
requested the Council provide direction regarding extending the Uplift Local 
Streets Program beyond May 31, 2021, and the Temporary Parklet Program 
beyond September 7, 2021.  The State's tiered opening system was 
scheduled to end on June 15, 2021 if certain conditions were met.  Thirty-
four permits for at-grade and platform parklets were issued or pending.  
Sixty-three encroachment permits were issued for sidewalk dining, and 31 
encroachment permits were issued.  Staff recommended extending the City 
Manager's authority to close streets to vehicular traffic from May 31, 2021, 
to September 7, 2021.  The City Manager's authority included reopening 
streets prior to September 7, 2021.  An online survey received 1,147 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
responses, 96 percent of which supported an extension of the Uplift Local 
Streets Program on California Avenue and 97 percent of which supported an 
extension of the program on University Avenue.  In addition, 286 email 
communications supported an extension of the program.  Parklet permits 
expired on September 7, 2021, and removal of parklets was required on that 
date.  Parklets expanded outdoor dining and enhanced the pedestrian 
environment.  Current parklet designs were likely to need significant 
remodeling to be more durable and to prevent flooding.  Some patrons and 
business owners preferred proximate car parking over dining.  Any conflicts 
between neighboring businesses needed to be addressed.  In the online 
survey, 97 percent of respondents supported extending the Temporary 
Parklet Program, and 94 percent supported development of a Permanent 
Parklet Program.  Thirty-four email communications supported extending the 
Temporary Parklet Program.   
Rebecca Eisenberg remarked that the City needed an economic development 
manager.  Other cities were doing much more than the City to support small 
businesses.   
John McDowell noted public support for the programs was widespread.  He 
encouraged the Council to direct Staff to consider the best aspects of the 
Temporary Parklet Program and build a long-term program. 
Michael Stone, Mollie Stone's Market, supported the Temporary Parklet 
Program and opposed extending the closure of California Avenue.  The 
closure of California Avenue caused a 20-percent decrease in his sales.   
Charlie Weidanz shared the Chamber of Commerce's efforts to support 
businesses during the pandemic.  The closure of University Avenue 
supported restaurants but did not necessarily support all businesses on 
University Avenue.  He asked the Council to consider all aspects of the 
University Avenue closure and the impact on all businesses. 
Boaz Maor commented that the two programs provided much needed relief 
for residents and businesses.  He hoped the Council made the programs 
permanent. 
Steve Sinchek indicated opening University and California Avenues to 
vehicular traffic reduced restaurant seating and staffing to less than pre-
pandemic levels.   
Rob Fischer opposed extending the street closures because they pushed 
traffic into neighborhoods and prevented customers from accessing some 
businesses.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Jessica Roth noted street closures did not benefit all businesses.  She 
proposed changes to the Uplift Local Streets Program.   
Council Member Filseth inquired whether Staff determined that the survey 
respondents were Palo Alto residents.  Many of the emails to the Council 
were not from Palo Alto residents. 
Ms. Tanner indicated the survey did not obtain the respondent's address.  
More than 1,000 of the respondents identified themselves as community 
members. 
Council Member Filseth noted that if the emergency order was lifted, the 
Uplift Local Streets Program was going to turn into a long-term outdoor 
dining strategy for Downtown and California Avenue.  Mollie Stone's Market 
was an important business in the California Avenue corridor.  The City's 
adventures with grocery stores in that area were mixed.   
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff received any information about 
changes in revenue for Country Sun. 
Kara Apple, Police Lieutenant, reported no information about Country Sun's 
revenues, but Country Sun supported street closures and allowed the 
farmers market to set up adjacent to the business. 
Council Member Cormack requested the conditions for ending the City's 
emergency order. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, advised that the Council was allowed to rescind 
its emergency order at any time.  The City Attorney, Director of Emergency 
Services, and he were listing actions needed when the local emergency order 
was rescinded. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about lessons learned with respect to 
circulation along California Avenue. 
Ms. Tanner indicated the public complained about circulation multiple times.  
Staff considered various alternatives.  Staff was concerned that California 
Avenue sidewalks were going to be too crowded during busy times.  The 
aisles allowed emergency vehicles and first responders to traverse California 
Avenue.  Staff planned to direct bicyclists to walk their bikes in the center of 
California Avenue.   
Council Member Cormack asked if there was going to be a gap between 
Temporary and Permanent Parklet Programs or if Staff planned to present a 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
different rationale to continue the Temporary Parklet Program until a 
Permanent Parklet Program was adopted. 
Ms. Tanner indicated both scenarios were possible.  An interim measure was 
needed if the Council did not want businesses to remove parklets during the 
gap. 
Council Member Cormack was open to extending the programs beyond 
September 2021. 
Council 
Member 
Stone 
concurred 
with 
extending 
the 
programs.  
Unfortunately, the pandemic was not over, and the programs were going to 
help keep people safe and encourage people to dine and shop locally during 
the summer.  When balancing public safety and economic recovery, 
extending the programs was logical.  He requested the City Manager's bases 
for deciding to close streets. 
Mr. Shikada recalled Staff's experimentation with street closures prior to the 
holidays.  The experimentation was done in consultation with adjacent 
businesses in order to assess their interests and priorities and the level of 
consensus.  In Downtown, the variety of perspectives was greater than on 
California Avenue.   
Council Member Stone noted the City Manager was authorized to end the 
Uplift Local Streets Program prior to the sunset date but not the Temporary 
Parklet Program. 
Mr. Shikada added that Staff also received significant community input 
regarding street closures.   
Council Member Stone requested the date of the groundbreaking ceremony 
for the Public Safety Building (PSB). 
Mr. Eggleston advised that some work was underway, but full-scale 
excavation was scheduled for late May or early June 2021. 
Council Member Stone asked if construction of the PSB and extending the 
Uplift Local Streets Program was going to create unmanageable traffic 
congestion.   
Mr. Eggleston answered no.  Birch Street and Jacaranda Lane were going to 
remain open. 
Council 
Member 
Stone 
requested 
clarification 
of 
the 
number 
of 
encroachment permits. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Ms. Tanner explained that encroachment permits for parklets, seating 
located in the street, and seating located on the sidewalk were different.   
Vice Mayor Burt believed street closures were beneficial.  Access to Mollie 
Stone's was difficult, but it was a treasured institution in the neighborhood.  
The Council needed to help Mollie Stone's if it extended the Uplift Local 
Streets Program for California Avenue.  The Architectural Review Board 
(ARB) and the Santa Clara County Chapter of the American Institute of 
Architects were interested in developing design standards for outdoor dining 
and parklets.  Small stages at either end of University Avenue and California 
Avenue for music, art, or other performances were likely to attract visitors.  
Speed limit signage for bikes was needed immediately.   
Council Member Kou noted retailers along California Avenue supported the 
programs even though they were not allowed to open.  Retailers deserved 
the same consideration as restaurants.  Waitstaff observed outdoor tables 
from the sidewalk and restricted access to the sidewalk to one person at a 
time.  The Council had to consider more than just support for the programs.  
The community needed more information in order to support the whole 
effort.  Residents did not appear to be participating in Uplift Local 
discussions.  She supported extending the programs but not creating 
permanent programs. 
Council Member Tanaka believed the programs created both challenges and 
benefits for the community and businesses.  The Temporary Parklet Program 
seemed to make sense; although, some restaurants did not get parklets for 
some reason.  The parklet needed to occupy only the space adjacent to the 
business.  He inquired about data for business closures. 
Mr. Shikada reported Staff had anecdotal information only.   
Council Member Tanaka felt Staff needed to collect data on business closures 
in order to figure out ways to improve the programs.  The Uplift Local 
Streets Program seemed to be more successful on California Avenue.  The 
farmers market booths needed to be placed back-to-back in the center of 
California Avenue.  Another option was to allow one lane of one-way traffic.   
Ms. Tanner indicated the current layout of the farmers market was 
successful, but Staff could discuss his suggestion with the farmers market. 
Ms. Apple related that social-distancing requirements were in force for the 
booths.  If booths faced the businesses, queues were going to form in front 
of the storefronts.   
Council Member Tanaka suggested the queues were potential customers.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Mayor DuBois asked if Staff had any traffic flow information.   
Ms. Tanner reported traffic counts were not conducted for the Staff Report.  
As restrictions decreased and traffic increased, traffic counts were going to 
be conducted. 
Mayor DuBois wanted Staff to conduct a census of Downtown and California 
Avenue businesses.  Many businesses did not attend meetings with Staff.  
He inquired about the possibility of lifting the emergency order in the June 
15, 2021 timeframe. 
Mr. Shikada advised that June 15, 2021 was a likely target date. 
Mayor DuBois felt businesses were going to try to come back as soon as 
possible and proposed tying some of the decisions to the removal of State 
tiers.   
Mr. Shikada explained that tying removal of the local emergency order to 
June 15, 2021, also removed the City's authority to close streets. 
Mayor DuBois needed more information before deciding to make these 
programs permanent.  If streets remained closed, they needed to be 
restricted to pedestrians.  The Staff Report contained little hard data.  He 
preferred to allow the Uplift Local Streets Program to expire on May 31, 
2021.  If the Temporary Parklet Program continued, the City needed to place 
a value on the land.   
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Burt 
to: 
A. 
Extend the City Manager’s authority to close portions of University 
Avenue and certain intersecting streets, and to close portions of 
California Avenue and certain intersecting streets as part of Uplift Local 
to October 31, 2021; 
i. 
Consider providing performance space; 
B. 
Direct Staff to return with a Resolution extending temporary parklets 
to December 31, 2021;  
C. 
Develop a permanent parklet program with the input of the 
Architectural Review Board; and  
D. 
Request Staff to review and pursue additional measures to support 
business negatively impacted under the current program 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Council Member Cormack remarked that the Motion provided the City 
Manager with the authority to make changes to the Uplift Local Streets 
Program as necessary.   
Vice Mayor Burt agreed with Mayor DuBois' comments about businesses 
trying to return to normal as quickly as possible.   
Council Member Kou asked if Staff planned to engage residents and 
businesses about these changes and development projects in the affected 
areas. 
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director, answered yes. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion,  “Request Staff to 
coordinate impacts of construction projects in the California Avenue and 
Downtown areas with street closures, and continue communicating with 
residents and businesses.” (New Part E) 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that Staff needed to review the 
authority for taking the action in Part A of the Motion and the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) exemption for the changes provided in the 
Motion.   
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council 
Member XX to direct Staff to gather census data from businesses Downtown 
and on California Avenue. 
Ms. Tanner indicated more than 80 percent of businesses supported 
extending the Uplift Local Streets and Temporary Parklet Programs and 
creating a Permanent Parklet Program.  She proposed Staff conduct a formal 
business-by-business query because limited resources were available for a 
census of businesses. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether the Council previously eliminated 
one of the business fees if businesses provided information. 
Ms. Tanner related that the Council eliminated the Business Registry fee. 
Mr. Shikada noted the Council increased Staff's workload with each Agenda 
Item.  Obtaining information from businesses was extremely difficult.  He 
encouraged Staff to speak up or accept the work. 
Ms. Apple advised that businesses provided the City with a notice of layoffs 
but were not required to notify the City of closures.  Property owners 
advocated for one proposal, and tenants advocated for an opposing 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 28 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
proposal.  She was the sole Staff member assigned to deal with all business 
sectors.   
Mr. Eggleston reported Staff was already coordinating construction projects 
and street closures.  Tracking Action Items from the Council added to Staff's 
workload. 
Mr. Shikada noted the farmers market operated on Sundays for a long time.  
Therefore, the farmers market did not impact Mollie Stone's revenues on 
Sundays.  The Municipal Code specifically prohibited offsite signage.  Staff 
installed temporary pedestrian-scale signage along University Avenue to 
direct people in various directions.   
Meghan Horrigan-Taylor, Chief Information Official, stated additional 
direction to support businesses was not necessary as Staff was supporting 
and would continue to support businesses.   
Vice Mayor Burt suggested referring some of the tasks to the Chamber of 
Commerce.  Some of the directions to Staff emphasized the need for Staff to 
continue previously direction. 
AMENDMENT WITHDRAWN BY THE MAKER 
Council Member Tanaka suggested the Planning and Transportation 
Commission (PTC) review the Uplift Local Streets and Permanent Parklet 
Programs and propose changes. 
Mr. Shikada noted the Council previously referred it to the PTC as urban 
design work. 
Mayor DuBois related that City communications did not address detours in 
the neighborhoods.  Survey data was difficult to interpret because of the 
lack of specific information.  He inquired whether the City Manager's 
authority was tied to the emergency order. 
Mr. Shikada answered yes. 
Ms. Stump concurred. 
Mayor DuBois asked if parklets were intended to be public or private 
property. 
Mr. Shikada advised that parklets remained public property.  Control was the 
question. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 29 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt preferred to leave a designation of public or private property 
open. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to obtain public input. 
Mayor DuBois asked if Staff interpreted Part C of the Motion as including 
leasing rates, a process to determine the space for which a business was 
eligible, and a process to handle conflicts between businesses. 
Mr. Shikada responded yes. 
Mayor DuBois inquired about obtaining public input for extending the 
Temporary Parklet Program and developing a Permanent Parklet Program. 
Mr. Shikada indicated the extension of the Temporary Parklet Program was 
going to return on the Consent Calendar.  The ARB and PTC were going to 
review the Permanent Parklet Program. 
Mayor DuBois did not support a Permanent Parklet Program at the current 
time or the lengthy extension of the Temporary Parklet Program.   
MOTION AS AMENDED SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING 
Council Member Filseth supported providing the City Manager with the 
authority to end the Uplift Local Streets Program.  He hoped Staff contacted 
Mollie Stone's Market.   
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Cormack moved, 
seconded by Vice Mayor Burt to: 
A. 
Extend the City Manager’s authority to close portions of University 
Avenue and certain intersecting streets, and to close portions of 
California Avenue and certain intersecting streets as part of Uplift Local 
to October 31, 2021;  
i. 
Consider providing performance space; 
B. 
Direct Staff to return with a Resolution extending temporary parklets 
to December 31, 2021;  
C. 
Develop a permanent parklet program with the input of the 
Architectural Review Board;  
D. 
Direct Staff to review and pursue additional measures to support 
businesses negatively impacted by the current program; and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 30 of 30 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/19/2021 
E. 
Request Staff to coordinate impacts of construction projects in the 
California Avenue and Downtown areas with street closures, an 
continue communicating with residents and businesses 
MOTION PARTS A-B PASSED:  5-2 DuBois, Kou no  
MOTION PART C PASSED:  5-2 DuBois, Kou no 
MOTION PARTS D-E PASSED:  6-1 Filseth no 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack reported the San Francisco Public Utilities 
Commission (SFPUC) requested a 10-percent voluntary reduction in 
irrigation from retail customers.   
Mayor DuBois noted the Cities Association general meeting was scheduled 
for May 20, 2021, and all Council Members were invited. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:50 P.M. in honor of Bill 
Busse.  
