CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 20 
Special Meeting 
January 11, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:04 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor DuBois announced updates from community nonprofits were going to 
be included in future Council Agendas.  Palo Alto Community Child Care was 
scheduled for January 25, 2021. 
Oral Communications 
Cari 
Templeton, 
speaking 
as 
an 
individual, 
advocated 
for 
safety 
improvements to the crosswalk at Walgreens in Midtown because a vehicle 
struck a child in the crosswalk recently.   
Terry Holzemer hoped the Council adopted a Resolution opposing Senate Bill 
(SB) 9 and SB 10. 
Peter Drekmeier, Tuolumne River Trust, indicated the Council supported the 
Bay-Delta Plan in 2020, but its representative to the Bay Area Water Supply 
and Conservation Agency (BAWSCA) testified before the San Francisco Public 
Utilities Commission (SFPUC) in support of the alternative voluntary 
agreement.  The representative needed to support Palo Alto's interests. 
Stephen Rosenblum shared a portion of his written comments to Council 
Member Cormack regarding her testimony before the SFPUC and her 
response.  He believed these actions and statements disqualified Council 
Member Cormack from representing the City at BAWSCA. 
Dave Warner noted Council Member Cormack subsequently stated she sent a 
letter indicating she was not representing Palo Alto when making those 
statements.  However, it was unknown whether the letter was publicly 
available or whether the letter noted Palo Alto's support for the Bay-Delta 
Plan.  Council Member Cormack needed to retract her statements before the 
SFPUC or resign from BAWSCA.  If she chose not to do so, he asked the 
Council to limit her role on the Council. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Shannon McEntee shared the benefits of an unimpaired water flow in the 
Tuolumne River and urged the Council to advocate for the Bay-Delta Plan. 
Rachel Hamburg proposed the City install a temporary bathroom and offer 
trash service to recreational vehicle (RV) dwellers parked along El Camino 
Real.   
Rebecca Eisenberg questioned whether the City investigated its Police 
Officers to determine if any participated in the riot in Washington, D.C.  She 
suggested the Council increase the number of Council seats to nine and 
require the seats be filled by African-Americans, especially women. 
Elaine Wood, Downtown Streets Team Board of Directors, read a letter from 
the Board correcting Mr. Byrd's statements to the Council on December 7, 
2020.  An Administrative Law Judge and a two-person panel entered findings 
in an unemployment insurance compensation matter.  The Palo Alto Weekly 
reported accurately regarding a former employee's claims of sexual 
harassment against the Downtown Streets Team. 
Julianne Frizzell requested the Council replace Council Member Cormack as 
Palo Alto's representative to BAWSCA. 
Aram James appreciated local newspapers' reporting on encryption of the 
Police Department's radio transmissions without due process and Mayor 
DuBois and Vice Mayor Burt's quick response.   
Minutes Approval 
1. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the November 30, December 14, and 
December 23, 2020 City Council Meetings. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kou to approve the Action Minutes for the November 30, December 14, and 
December 23, 2020 City Council Meetings. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Mayor DuBois inquired regarding Council Members receiving responses to 
their questions about Agenda Items.  The Council packet was released late. 
Council Member Stone advised that he did not receive responses. 
Mayor DuBois asked if the City Manager wanted to respond to Council 
Members' questions. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that discussion of Consent Calendar 
Items was not consistent with Council procedures.  Council Members needed 
to remove an item from the Consent Calendar if they wished to discuss it. 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether continuing Agenda Item Number 5 
for one week was possible under Council procedures. 
Ms. Stump recommended Council Members remove the item from the 
Consent Calendar.  The Council was allowed to refrain from discussion and 
entertain a Motion.  Removing Agenda Item Number 5 from the Consent 
Calendar required the support of a majority of Council Members because it 
was the second reading of an Ordinance.   
MOTION:  Council Member Stone moved, seconded by Council Member Kou, 
third by Vice Mayor Burt, fourth by Mayor DuBois to pull Agenda Item 
Number 5 to be heard on a date uncertain. 
Council Member Tanaka registered no votes on Agenda Item Numbers 2 and 
4. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Burt to approve 
Agenda Item Numbers 2-4. 
2. 
Approval of a Purchase Order With Altec Industries in an Amount Not-
to-Exceed $633,866 for the Purchase of two 2022 DH50 Hydraulic 
Digger Derrick Rear Mount Crane Trucks, Utilizing a Cooperative 
Purchasing Agreement and Funded Under Capital Improvement Project 
VR-20000. 
3. 
Resolution 9937 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Amending the Conflict of Interest Code for Designated City 
Officers and Employees as Required by the Political Reform Act and 
Regulations of the Fair Political Practices Commission, and Repealing 
Resolution Number 9800”. 
4. 
Ordinance 5513 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Amending Section 18.52.070 (Parking Regulations for CD 
Assessment District) to Temporarily Extend Ineligibility of Certain Uses 
to Participate in the University Avenue In-lieu Parking Program for 18 
Months”. (FIRST READING: December 7, 2020 PASSED: 4-2 Fine, 
Tanaka no, Cormack absent) 
5. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of a Temporary Ordinance Amending 
Title 18 (Zoning) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code to Broaden 
Permissible Uses and Raise Thresholds for Conditional Use Permits for 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Some Land Uses Throughout the City. Environmental Review: 
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Exemption 15061(b)(3) 
(FIRST READING: December 14, 2020 PASSED: 7-0). 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 2 AND 4:  6-1 Tanaka 
no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 3:  7-0 
Council Member Tanaka preferred the City pay maintenance costs or rent 
trucks rather than purchase trucks and noted the Staff Report was lacking 
information.   
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, advised that the trucks in Agenda Item Number 2 
were vital to the Utilities Department, and the current trucks were 
approaching obsolescence.  The trucks were special funded and not fungible 
with General Fund resources.  The Regional Stay at Home Order was 
extended indefinitely.  The State announced economic stimulus package 
programs for businesses and low-income residents and a proposal to extend 
the eviction moratorium.  A State order allowed medical facilities to request 
mutual aid for staffing, and four Palo Alto Fire Paramedics were deployed to 
Kern County.  The deadline to apply for the COVID-19 Relief Grant program 
was January 13, 2021.  Information regarding COVID-19 vaccinations was 
available at sccfreevax.org.  Phase 1A of the vaccination plan was underway, 
and Plans for Phase 1B were being developed.  Free COVID-19 testing was 
scheduled for January 22 and February 5 and 26, 2021.  Curative was 
providing free testing, but the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) issued a 
notice of a higher risk for false negative results from Curative tests.  
Foothills Park was open to everyone.  Because of increased visitation, Staff 
was exploring access options and providing vehicle counts on the website.  
The Police Department encrypted radio transmissions in compliance with a 
Department of Justice requirement to protect personally identifiable 
information.  Virtual Martin Luther King Jr. Day celebrations were planned 
for January 18, 2021.   
Action Items 
6. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Objections to Weed Abatement and Adoption of 
Resolution 9938 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Ordering Weed Nuisance Abated”. 
Public Hearing opened at 6:15 P.M. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Dancia Bostrom, 419 Wilton, explained that weeds occurred when her 
professional lawn service was not allowed to work under the shelter in place 
order.  The service resumed as allowed, and the property was well 
maintained.   
Rebecca Eisenberg, addressing the Consent Calendar, remarked regarding 
Vice Mayor Burt's conflict of interest in the CPI matter.  Council Members 
needed to disclose actual and potential conflicts of interest whether or not 
they recused themselves. 
Sherry Wei, 2660 Bryant Street, advised that her gardener complied with 
the shelter in place order and did not work on her property for a few weeks.  
Consequently, she received a notice of being placed in the weed abatement 
program.  The gardener returned to work when allowed to do so, and the 
property was well maintained. 
Litai Weng and David Liu, 2349 Greer Road, advised that the inspector 
visited his property when his gardener was not allowed to work under the 
shelter in place order.  The grass was well maintained.   
Public Hearing closed at 6:27 P.M. 
Moe Kumre, Santa Clara County Fire Marshall, reported properties were 
inspected on May 1, 2020.  The Shelter in Place Order did not prohibit 
property owners and tenants from cutting their lawns.   
Geo Blackshire, Fire Chief, recalled residents' confusion regarding activities 
allowed under the Shelter in Place Order.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether the number of properties needing 
weed abatement was higher than usual. 
Mr. Kumre did not believe there was an extraordinary increase in the 
number of properties located within the city limits of Palo Alto. 
Council Member Cormack noted some residents did not own equipment or 
were not physically capable of landscape work.  She asked if there was 
evidence that the property owners rectified the problems. 
Mr. Kumre advised that additional information was not available because the 
inspectors had no authority for additional actions until the current process 
was complete. 
Council Member Cormack indicated her willingness to remove the three 
properties from the program because gardeners were asked to shelter in 
place at the time of inspections. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt concurred with Council Member Cormack's comments.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack 
to adopt the Resolution ordering the abatement of weed nuisances in the 
City of Palo Alto, with the exclusion of the properties owned by Dancia 
Bostrom (419 Wilton), Sherry Wei (2660 Bryant), and Litai Weng and David 
Liu (2349 Greer). 
Vice Mayor Burt stated he had no business interest in his previous company 
at the time the Council reviewed the CPI matter.  The environmental 
achievements of his previous company were renowned throughout the 
region.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the number of properties that were 
placed in the program previously. 
Mr. Kumre agreed to provide that information at a later time. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested Council Members consider not taking 
action against the properties given the COVID-19 situation.  Residents may 
not know how to contact the Council to explain their circumstances. 
Mr. Kumre related that notices of the meeting and the opportunity to 
address the Council were sent to residents.   
Council Member Tanaka did not support the Motion. 
Council Member Kou indicated the program was important for identifying fire 
hazards.  The Shelter in Place Order was not clear. 
Council Member Stone noted the objectors' statements that they remedied 
the situation.  Therefore, removing them from the program was reasonable.  
It was not appropriate to remove all property owners without testimony from 
them. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
7. 
Approval of the Macias Gini & O’Connell’s Audit of the City of Palo 
Alto’s Financial Statements as of June 30, 2020 and the Management 
Letter; Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report 
(CAFR); and FY 2020 Budget Amendments in Various Funds. 
Kiely Nose, Administrative Services Director/Chief Financial Officer, reported 
the Finance Committee reviewed the reports in December 2020.  The City 
ended fiscal year (FY) 2020 in a positive position, which resulted from 
Budget reductions and a surplus in Enterprise Funds.  The Budget 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Stabilization Reserve (BSR) balance was slightly below the target of 18.5 
percent of expenses but within the target range of 15 percent to 20 percent.  
Overall, budgeted expenses remained within approved funding levels, but 
Staff recommended realignments among departments and the timing of 
capital projects.   
Kyle O’Rourke, City Auditor, advised that audits of basic financial 
statements, the cable TV franchise, the Public Improvement Corporation, 
and the Regional Water Quality Control Plant as well as agreed-upon 
procedures for appropriations were presented for Council review.  The 
auditors provided an unmodified opinion with no material weaknesses, no 
errors, and no reportable findings and concluded that the City complied with 
accounting standards.  The final audit was to be completed by March 2021. 
Ms. Nose defined government-wide financial statements and fund financial 
statements.  Overall, the City ended the fiscal year with a net position of 
$1.2 billion, which included net investment in capital assets, restricted 
funds, and unrestricted funds.  Across all funds, the net position increased 
by approximately $34 million over FY 2019.  Governmental fund balances 
totaled approximately $266 million, a $38 million decrease from FY 2019.  
The BSR balance was $35.9 million, a decrease of $18.9 million from FY 
2019.  With the exception of the Refuse Fund, Enterprise Funds ended the 
year with a positive change in net position.  The Capital Projects Fund ended 
the year with a balance of $84 million.  Proposed Budget adjustments were 
realignments in the General Fund among departments and adjustments to 
revenue and expenditures in the Capital Projects Fund.   
Council took a break at 6:58 P.M. and returned at 7:10 P.M. 
Council Member Tanaka related that he did not support the proposed 
increase in funding for the Public Safety Building (PSB) during the Finance 
Committee's discussion.  He preferred to postpone the PSB project due to 
constraints on the budget.   
Council Member Cormack complimented Staff on the use of savings to 
ensure the BSR balance was within the target range.  She requested the 
status of the two new Marriott hotels located on San Antonio.   
Ms. Nose believed they were open, but official openings were anticipated in 
the first quarter of 2021.   
Council Member Cormack asked if any of the workers' compensation claims 
were related to COVID-19. 
Ms. Nose replied no. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt noted the importance of the unmodified opinion.  With 
respect to Council Member Tanaka's comments, the audit pertained to FY 
2020.  The Council was going to discuss the Capital Budget for the 
remainder of FY 2021 in the next few weeks.   
Council Member Kou indicated she seemed to be missing Attachment A, 
Exhibit 2.  She inquired whether electric customer connections were cost 
recovery. 
Ms. Nose answered yes. 
Council Member Kou asked if the decrease in Documentary Transfer Tax was 
based on number of units sold or prices. 
Ms. Nose explained that Property Tax revenue was based on a combination 
of prices, turnover, development, and adjustments.  The Documentary 
Transfer Tax was based on transactions.  The assessed value used to 
calculate Property Tax lagged by a year.  Staff projected FY 2022 revenue 
was going to be flat because it was based on the assessed value during 
COVID-19.  With respect to the attachment, the Staff Report incorrectly 
referred to Attachment A and should be Attachment B. 
Mayor DuBois requested the reason for the dramatic decrease in unrestricted 
funds.   
Ms. Nose reported the decrease occurred because of changes in accounting 
principles related to pension and Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) 
liabilities. 
Mayor DuBois noted that unrestricted funds did not mean the Council had 
not allocated them.  He requested the contribution plan for the Section 115 
Trust. 
Ms. Nose advised that Council policy was to budget normal costs for pension 
obligations annually using a lower discount rate, which was currently 6.2 
percent.  The difference between the City's discount rate and the California 
Public Employees' Retirement System (CalPERS) discount rate was deposited 
to the Section 115 Trust.  If the BSR contained excess funds, the City 
Manager was authorized to transfer 50 percent of the excess to capital 
investment and 50 percent to the Section 115 Trust.  Normal costs were 
approximately $2 million for the General Fund and $3-$5 million for all 
funds. 
Mayor DuBois felt $300,000 for COVID-19 office improvement was not going 
to be sufficient. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to approve:  
A. 
The City of Palo Alto’s audited financial statements for the fiscal year 
ended June 30, 2020, and the accompanying reports provided by 
Macias Gini & O’Connell (“MGO”) LLP (Office of the City Auditor Report) 
Reports include:  
i. 
Report to the City Council (the “Management Letter”);  
ii. 
Cable 
TV 
Franchise, 
Independent 
Auditor’s 
Report 
and 
Statements of Franchise Revenues and Expenses for the years 
ended December 31, 2019 and 2018; 
iii. 
Palo Alto Public Improvement Corporation (a component unit of 
the City of Palo Alto) Annual Financial Report for the year ended 
June 30, 2020; 
iv. 
Regional Water Quality Control Plant, Independent Auditor’s 
Report and Financial Statements for the year ended June 30, 
2020; 
v. 
Independent Accountant’s Report on Applying Agreed-Upon 
Procedures related to the Article XIII-B Appropriations (GANN) 
Limit for the year ended June 30, 2020; 
B. 
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report 
(CAFR), included in CMR #11741 with corrected section Attachment II 
and III respectively; and 
C. 
Amendments to the Fiscal Year 2020 Budget Appropriation Ordinance 
for various funds as identified in CMR #11741. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated the level of detail in the reports and 
believed the community was proud of the City's management of its finances. 
Vice Mayor Burt concurred with Council Member Cormack's comments and 
commended Staff for thorough and transparent reporting. 
Ms. Nose indicated the FY 2021 Budget assumed a $5 million contribution to 
the Section 115 Trust.  Of that amount, $3 million was going to be taken 
from the General Fund. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING 
MOTION PASSED FOR PARTS A AND B:  7-0 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
MOTION PASSED FOR PART C:  6-1 Tanaka no 
8. 
Update and Discussion on the Plan Bay Area 2050 Final Blueprint and 
the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) Processes; and 
Direction to Staff Regarding the City’s Response, Including Preparation 
of Formal Comment Letters. 
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning and Development Service, reported public 
hearings before the Association of Bay Area Governments' (ABAG) Executive 
Board 
and 
Regional 
Planning 
Commission 
and 
the 
Metropolitan 
Transportation Commission (MTC) were scheduled in January.  Staff 
prepared draft comment letters regarding Plan Bay Area and the Regional 
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the Council's consideration.  ABAG/MTC 
was poised to support a Final Blueprint for the region.  Notable changes 
between the Draft Blueprint and the Final Blueprint included household and 
job growth patterns.  The RHNA methodology for distributing housing units 
was updated based on the Final Blueprint.  The projected increase in Palo 
Alto's RHNA was reduced from 36 percent to 22 percent or 10,058 units to 
6,086 units.   
Gab Layton, speaking for Joe Hirsch, Winter Dellenbach, Chris Robell, Asher 
Waldfogel, and Nielson Buchanan, discussed five methodologies for the 
distribution of housing units to regions and perceived flaws. 
Rebecca Eisenberg believed the high cost of housing in Palo Alto was caused 
by high demand and low supply.   
Joe Spaulding felt the decision to build housing was based on the acceptance 
or rejection of existing segregation.  He encouraged the Council to comply 
with the 10,000-unit allocation. 
Aram James advocated for a safe parking program, very-low-income 
housing, a local reparations committee, and setting aside housing for 
African-Americans.   
Greg Schmid stated the source of new jobs and housing projections for the 
Bay Area was based on a wild assumption.  Public analysis of the numbers 
was essential.  ABAG's methodology was not acceptable. 
Mark Mollineaux commented that land use in Palo Alto upheld racial and 
class segregation.  The State granted jurisdictions the authority to determine 
land use.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Rohin Ghosh remarked that the lack of home construction for people of 
different backgrounds and attempting to reduce the housing allocation 
continued segregation.   
Terry Holzemer indicated that ABAG's methodology violated several State 
Codes, focused only on job-rich areas, and did not consider COVID-19.  He 
suggested the comment letters explain that the methodology was flawed and 
that the City's allocation needed to be reduced. 
Kevin Ma felt sending a comment letter was gutsy when the City's allocation 
was reduced the most of all cities in the region.  Families with children were 
needed in the City to provide revenue for Palo Alto Unified School District 
(PAUSD).  More housing was wanted and needed.   
Kelsey Banes expressed disappointment with the reduction in the City's 
allocation.  Fulfilling the allocation was not going to fulfill the actual need for 
housing. 
Council Member Kou noted ABAG's reducing the allocations for Palo Alto and 
Cupertino only was divisive.  The number of housing units allocated to the 
region was flawed.  The Final Blueprint was not going to achieve ABAG's 
guiding principles.  Jobs needed to be distributed more diversely.  RHNA was 
punitive and eliminated local control.   
Council Member Stone disclosed his seat on the Embarcadero Institute Board 
of Directors, but he received no compensation and did not participate in 
drafting Ms. Layton's report.  The flawed methodology and the streamlining 
process of Senate Bill (SB) 35 was going to make affordable housing 
development more difficult.  He requested the City's progress in achieving 
current allocations, particularly the allocation for market-rate housing. 
Mr. Lait indicated the total current allocation was 1,988 units.  The City 
issued permits for 734 units and achieved 10-15 percent of the allocation for 
lower-income levels and 92 percent of the allocation for the above-
moderate-income level. 
Council Member Stone inquired whether the SB 35 streamlining process 
circumvented the City's affordable housing incentives such that a project 
with less than the required inclusionary housing was subject to streamlined 
approval. 
Mr. Lait reported projects were subject to the City's affordable housing 
requirement of 15 percent even if the City was subject to the streamlining 
process.  That was subject to change in the future. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff had any additional information 
regarding the change in allocations between the Draft and Final Blueprint. 
Mr. Lait answered no.  Staff requested but did not receive any specific 
jurisdictional data.   
Council Member Cormack requested the meaning of recession impacts to the 
construction industry. 
Mr. Lait did not know.  Locally, applications for smaller projects were being 
submitted.  Because of the recession, financing for larger projects was more 
difficult to obtain.  One of the questions was the distribution of the 2050 
housing goal in eight-year housing cycles.   
Council Member Cormack appreciated the letters providing specific 
comments and taking a more modulated tone than prior letters.  The 
scenario for telecommuting was not the most realistic one. 
Council Member Filseth preferred the letters not suggest reassigning a 
portion of Palo Alto's allocation to other cities, but pushing back on the 
overall process and number was reasonable.  The State was attempting to 
eliminate local planning through legislation proposing zoning templates for 
failure to achieve allocations and large and aggressive allocations.  He 
suggested expanding the discussion of Palo Alto's office development caps 
and including numbers. 
Vice Mayor Burt related that over the past 30 years, Palo Alto failed to meet 
its allocations for middle-income or workforce housing more so than other 
categories because there were no subsidies for workforce housing.  The City 
was attempting to address workforce housing by funding a project with the 
County of Santa Clara (County) and implementing the Housing Incentive 
Program and the Housing Planned Community (HPC).  SB 35 was going to 
exacerbate the jobs/housing imbalance because it required projects to have 
equal square footage for office and housing.   
Mayor DuBois requested the rationale for two letters rather than one. 
Mr. Lait clarified that one letter addressed RHNA, and the other addressed 
Plan Bay Area.  Combining the letters into one was possible. 
Mayor DuBois wanted Staff to return to the Council more frequently than 
outlined in the Staff Report.  With an allocation of 6,000 units, the City was 
likely to miss both the affordable and market-rate allocations.  The letters 
needed to start with the accuracy of the forecasts for overall need in the 
state and Bay Area.  Comments appeared to focus on a desire for a workable 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
solution and concerns about State laws.  The number of cities objecting to 
the process appeared to be accelerating.  The letters needed to refer to an 
unfunded mandate that was going to have real repercussions and a concern 
that numbers needed to be based in reality.  The COVID-19 discussion 
needed to include long-term and short-term impacts.  More attention needed 
to be paid to an overall allocation cap based on development feasibility.   
Council Member Stone inquired whether the Council needed to amend its 
inclusionary requirement to 80 percent of Area Median Income (AMI) to 
prevent SB 35 from superseding the inclusionary rate. 
Mr. Lait indicated the City was likely not to be subject to SB 35 in the 
current housing cycle.  Staff needed to research the best position for the 
City to achieve the type of affordability stated in policies.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney, reported the Council needed to act in the next 
four years to prepare for SB 35.   
Council Member Stone expressed concern about the State not providing 
cities with funding to meet housing goals but imposing penalties that 
resulted in cities falling further behind in creating affordable housing.   
Council Member Kou proposed including in the letter the jobs/housing fit.  
The use of a flawed methodology was going to recur until someone 
determined what was feasible.   
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member Kou 
to: 
A. 
Direct Staff to submit a comment letter to the Association of Bay Area 
Governments (ABAG) and Metropolitan Transportation Commission 
(MTC) on the Plan Bay Area 2050 Final Blueprint;  
B. 
Direct Staff to submit a comment letter to the ABAG Regional Planning 
Committee and ABAG Executive Board on the proposed 6th Cycle Draft 
RHNA Methodology, along with the following: 
I. 
Ask ABAG and MTC to press HCD to resolve the challenges to 
their projections and revise targets as appropriate; 
II. 
Expand discussion of Palo Alto’s Office Development Caps with 
actual numbers, if appropriate; and 
III. 
Include consideration of long-term remote work impacts. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Council Member Filseth remarked that the Vallco SB 35 project was a 
disaster because the amount of office space created demand for thousands 
more housing units than it supplied. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to direct the City Attorney to reach out to William 
Curley with Harper and Burns, LLP to discuss their appeals and preparations 
with other cities for potential litigation. (New Part E)  
Council Member Kou wished to understand the issues and actions other cities 
were contemplating.   
Ms. Stump agreed to seek information in which the Council was interested.  
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) provided its 
cities with final RHNA numbers and, thus, the numbers were ripe for appeal.  
ABAG's final RHNA numbers were not available yet.   
Council Member Cormack recalled the Council referring funding for 
affordable housing to the Finance Committee in 2020, but it was not on the 
Finance Committee's status report at the end of the year.  She requested 
clarification of the allocation cap and how it related to the development cap. 
Mr. Lait advised that it was the number of units that a jurisdiction could 
reasonably accommodate.  Staff was concerned regarding the City's ability 
to achieve 6,000 units.   
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of the renter protection 
measure under housing strategy. 
Mr. Lait explained that the renter protection measure aligned with the 
Council's policies.   
Council Member Cormack inquired regarding official challenges to the 
California Department of Housing and Community Development's (HCD) 
projections. 
Mr. Lait noted there was a limited time period for ABAG to challenge the 
Regional Housing Needs Determination (RHND) issued in July 2020.  The 
ability to appeal the RHND expired with the challenge period. 
Council Member Filseth related that the intent of Part B.i was to push HCD to 
revisit the RHND or at least to respond to any challenges.   
Council Member Cormack did not believe the language of Part B.i reflected 
that. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Mr. Lait indicated that Staff discussed it with ABAG/MTC, and ABAG/MTC 
referred Staff to HCD.  Staff communicated with HCD, and HCD responded 
that it was not going to address it.  Procedurally, the issue had run its 
course, and he was not aware of any further actions for Staff to take. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to direct Staff to also include in the letters an 
introductory paragraph which covers the City’s policies to improve our social 
and economic balance, as well as emphasizing what we have done on 
restraining office growth, and our focus on low to moderate income housing. 
(New Part C) 
Vice Mayor Burt proposed Mayor DuBois and Council Member Filseth review 
and approve the final draft of the letters.  The Council needed to engage 
local legislators in meaningful discussions of these issues.   
Mayor DuBois preferred to retain the language for ABAG/MTC to address the 
issue with HCD, but Council Members needed to pursue political alignment 
as well.  With respect to Part B.iii, the letter addressed remote work.   
Council Member Filseth questioned whether the letter needed to request 
ABAG/MTC make an assumption regarding remote work. 
Mayor DuBois proposed an amendment for Staff to evaluate a bottom-up 
model of housing construction feasibility during the sixth housing cycle.  
Some jurisdiction-level analysis may be useful.   
Mr. Lait did not believe there was time to conduct analyses prior to ABAG 
making its recommendations to HCD.  A feasibility analysis was based on 
existing zoning, but zoning was going to have to change to accommodate 
the RHNA numbers.  The Housing Element Update included vetting of other 
parameters for analyses. 
Mayor DuBois did not understand how a feasibility cap or range was 
determined. 
Mr. Lait explained that distributing the RHNA number equally across 
jurisdictions resulted in 16 percent.  The City was now at 22 percent.  A 
feasibility cap between 16 percent and 22 percent was likely a reasonable 
number.   
Council Member Filseth requested the number contained  in the 
Comprehensive Plan. 
Mr. Lait responded 35 to 43. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Council Member Filseth wanted to explore a feasibility cap, but it was 
probably going to be a difficult analysis.   
Mr. Lait clarified that the City needed to retain a consultant for an analysis. 
Mayor DuBois clarified that his proposal was for Staff to evaluate developing 
a model, not to develop a model. 
Mr. Lait remarked that many factors determined whether a property owner 
chose to develop or redevelop his property, and the factors were different 
for each property owner.   
Mayor DuBois suggested Staff return to the Council with RHNA updates as 
needed but at least every other month. 
Mr. Lait agreed to return as often as the Council wished, but particularly 
prior to decision points.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion Part B. i. “… such as, but not 
only included in, the Embarcadero Institute and Freddie Mac reports ... .” 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to direct Staff to provide final drafts of the letters 
to Mayor DuBois and Council Member Filseth for review prior to submittal. 
(New Part D) 
Council Member Filseth proposed the Council agendize a Resolution opposing 
State abrogation of local zoning. 
Mayor DuBois indicated that topic was not part of the Agenda Item. 
Council Member Tanaka asked whether the City had any direct authority 
over ABAG. 
Mr. Lait reported the City had no direct role in  RHNA or its distribution.  The 
City was allowed to attempt to influence the decision-makers.   
Council Member Tanaka remarked that economic recovery and COVID-19 
vaccinations were larger concerns than overdevelopment.  Perhaps Council 
time was better spent on those topics than crafting these letters. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by 
Council Member Kou to: 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
A. 
Direct Staff to submit a comment letter to the Association of Bay Area 
Governments (ABAG) and Metropolitan Transportation Commission 
(MTC) on the Plan Bay Area 2050 Final Blueprint;  
B. 
Direct Staff to submit a comment letter to the ABAG Regional Planning 
Committee and ABAG Executive Board on the proposed 6th Cycle Draft 
RHNA Methodology, along with the following: 
i. 
Ask ABAG and MTC to press HCD to resolve the challenges to 
their projections such as, but not only included in, the 
Embarcadero Institute and Freddie Mac reports, and revise their 
targets as appropriate; 
ii. 
Expand the discussion of Palo Alto’s office development caps 
with actual numbers, if appropriate; 
iii. 
Include consideration of long-term remote work impacts; 
C. 
Direct Staff to also include in the letters an introductory paragraph 
which covers the city’s policies to improve our social and economic 
balance, as well as emphasizing what we have done on restraining 
office growth, and our focus on low to moderate income housing; 
D. 
Direct Staff to provide final drafts of the letters to Mayor DuBois and 
Council Member Filseth for review prior to submittal; and 
E. 
Direct the City Attorney to reach out to William Curley with Harper and 
Burns, LLP to discuss their appeals and preparations with other cities 
for potential litigations. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
Council took a break at 9:50 P.M. and returned at 9:56 P.M. 
9. 
Approval of the Nomination of Vice Mayor Pat Burt and Council 
Member Alison Cormack to be Considered for the Santa Clara Valley 
Transportation Authority (VTA) Board. 
Mayor DuBois noted the Agenda Item was presented in a Colleagues' Memo. 
Council Member Kou reported that the previous Bylaws did not allow the 
nomination of newly elected Council Members to the Santa Clara Valley 
Transportation Authority (VTA) Board.  Because of his prior terms on the 
Council and negotiations with VTA, Vice Mayor Burt was an appropriate 
nominee.  Placing appointments to regional bodies on the Consent Calendar 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
was not transparent and did not obtain community input.  The City needed 
regular representation at the VTA Board. 
Gail Price supported the nomination of Council Member Cormack, who led 
significant campaigns and applied strategy, insight and a measured 
approach to complex topics.  The effort to change the nomination was 
launched by the Mayor and Vice Mayor who intended to assume more 
leadership roles.   
Mark Weiss expressed concern regarding the nomination of Vice Mayor Burt 
and supported the nomination of Council Member Cormack for the VTA 
Board only. 
Rebecca Eisenberg urged the Council to further a culture of equality and 
inclusion.  Council Member Cormack was more qualified for the appointment 
than other Council Members. 
Winter Dellenbach expressed concern regarding the Council having outdated 
Bylaws.  There were significant differences between the 2015 and current 
versions of Bylaws.   
Joe Spaulding commented that nominating Vice Mayor Burt for regional 
bodies was going to embarrass the City.   
Council Member Cormack advised that the Council unanimously approved 
her nomination to the VTA Board in October 2020.  The Mayor's email to the 
working group two months later was unprofessional.  The procedures for the 
working group did not contemplate this dilemma.  The Mayor's action may 
result in Los Altos Hills filling the seat.  She did not understand the purpose 
of sending two nominees to the working group.   
Council Member Stone noted that representation on the VTA Board was 
critical to most Palo Alto residents.  Both Vice Mayor Burt and Council 
Member Cormack were qualified to advocate for Palo Alto.  The Bylaws 
allowed the City to nominate two Council Members. 
Council Member Filseth inquired as to the body deciding which of the two 
nominees served on the Board. 
Mayor DuBois answered the four cities that formed the PAC. 
Council Member Filseth questioned the desire for the PAC rather than the 
Council to select the representative. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Council Member Tanaka commented that two nominees may dilute the City's 
chances.  Council Member Cormack was always prepared, and her style was 
not abrasive.   
Mayor DuBois indicated that the VTA Board position was important for 
funding grade separations, bike paths, and bus service.  The four cities 
comprising Group 2 were transitioning people.  Mountain View nominated 
two representatives in the previous cycle.  Nominees were required to meet 
two of four qualifications.  The Council needed to make a decision during the 
meeting.   
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to nominate Council Member Alison Cormack to be considered for 
the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) Board. 
Council Member Cormack reviewed her qualifications that fulfilled Criteria 3 
and 4. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Mayor 
DuBois to nominate Vice Mayor Burt to be considered for the Santa Clara 
Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) Board. 
Council Member Kou agreed that Council Member Cormack was qualified; 
however, Vice Mayor Burt had many years of experience in the 
transportation field.  She expected Vice Mayor Burt to advocate for the 
agreed-upon allocation of Measure B funding.   
Mayor DuBois noted Vice Mayor Burt had extensive experience with rail.  As 
a newly elected Council Member, it was possible for him to serve on the 
Board for four years. 
Vice Mayor Burt reviewed his qualifications and experience.  Collaboration 
was going to be needed to address VTA funding deficits.   
Council Member Stone supported Vice Mayor Burt because of his experience 
with VTA.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION PASSED:  5-2 Cormack, Tanaka no  
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Mayor DuBois reported that he released assignments earlier in the day.  The 
accident that Ms. Templeton mentioned was concerning, and Staff was 
assessing the matter. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/11/2021 
Council Member Cormack proposed the Council consider reopening and 
rebuilding Cubberley Community Center with Palo Alto Unified School District 
(PAUSD), perhaps during the discussion of Council Priorities. 
Vice Mayor Burt indicated Mayor DuBois and he attended the Citizen Corps 
Council meeting regarding the COVID-19 vaccine and resources. 
Mayor DuBois advised that he participated in a County of Santa Clara 
(County) meeting regarding the vaccine.  He urged residents to remain 
vigilant in following protocols.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned in memory of Lenore Cymes at 
10:41 P.M. 
