CITY COUNCIL MEETING 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 24 
Special Meeting 
April 5, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:01 P.M. 
Participating Remotely:  Burt, Cormack,  DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Study Session 
1. 
Report and Discussion Regarding Police Services, Including Policy 
Updates, Crime 
Statistics, Radio 
Encryption, and 
Independent 
Auditing. 
Robert Jonsen, Police Chief, reported the Police Department's goals were to 
provide excellent service, proactively enforce the law, and serve the 
community with extreme professionalism.  During the Shelter-in-Place 
Order, Police personnel continued to respond to emergency calls, investigate 
crimes, make arrests, and fulfill obligations associated with emergency 
response.  Significant budget reductions resulted in a 17-percent decrease in 
overall staffing.  The Dispatch Center was the third busiest in Santa Clara 
County with more than 140,000 calls for service to the Police Department, 
Fire Department, Public Works, Emergency Medical Services (EMS), Utilities, 
Animal Control, and Stanford Public Safety.  More than 99 percent of 911 
calls were answered within ten seconds, and the average arrival-on-scene 
time was slightly more than six minutes.  Palo Alto remained a very safe 
city.  Property crimes continued to be the most common types of crime.  
Police reform measures focused on community engagement, transparency, 
and accountability.  The Police Department expanded the Independent Police 
Auditor's (IPA) scope of review and facilitated more than 30 demonstrations 
and marches during the summer and fall of 2020 with no arrests.  Notable 
changes included an online reporting system, which received more than 300 
reports and saved more than 400 hours of staff time.  Staff worked closely 
with the Silicon Valley Regional Interoperability Authority (SVRIA) to develop 
work-arounds for radio encryption so that the Police Department complied 
with the Department of Justice (DOJ) mandate to protect personally 
identifiable information (PII).  The mandate provided two methods of 
compliance, neither of which mentioned the use of personal phones or 
distribution of radios to outside entities.  Seven SVRIA partners implemented 
encrypted communications prior to Palo Alto.  Police personnel contacted 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
PulsePoint the prior week to discuss the creation of a platform for law 
enforcement communications similar to the one available for Fire 
Department and EMS communications.  Any alternative solution had to 
protect PII as required by the mandate.  In 2020, a handful of complaints 
filed by members of the public resulted in seven supervisory inquiry 
investigations and one internal affairs investigation.  Use of force incidents 
totaled 12 in 2020.  All use of force incidents involving serious injury from 
2020 forward were going to be referred to the IPA.  Currently, the Police 
Department had two K-9 units, both of which were highly trained.  From 
2018 to 2020, K-9 teams deployed 350 times, five which resulted in a 
bite/hold of a suspect, and completed 250 public relations details.  The 
Department sought Council's guidance regarding evaluation of a drone 
program for high-risk incidents.  The Palo Alto Police Department hoped to 
launch a Psychological Emergency Response Team (PERT) and planned to 
continue meeting with the Chief's Advisory Group, implementing technology, 
adapting to fiscal challenges, and prioritizing the safety of residents, 
businesses, and visitors.  Public Safety was not an easy profession, but 
personnel continued to strive to meet expectations. 
Rebecca 
Eisenberg 
remarked 
that 
the 
Police 
Department 
needed 
accountability to prevent further violent incidents against minorities.  Law 
enforcement communications were not to include public identifiable 
information (PII); therefore, encryption was not necessary.   
Aram James commented that Chief Jonsen was the least transparent Police 
Chief in Palo Alto's history.  K-9 public relations details with children were 
not appropriate.  The Police Department had an unabated history of racist 
practices.  City Staff did not respond to his requests for public information.   
Hamilton Hitchings supported development of a platform similar to 
PulsePoint for law enforcement communications and the use of a drone in 
high-risk situations.  Hopefully, union concessions helped increase 
transparency and accountability. 
Rita Vrhel did not understand the Police Department's encryption of 
communications in light of incidents of police brutality.  The Council needed 
to investigate activities that did not serve the community.   
Kelsey Banes inquired regarding the accountability action taken in 2018 in 
response to a K-9 incident.   
Kevin Ma suggested the Council increase accountability for the Police 
Department given the incident with the K-9 team.  Encryption of radio 
communications 
needed 
to 
be 
analyzed 
and 
discussed 
prior 
to 
implementation.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Salim Damerdji commented regarding the recent K-9 incident and Officer 
Enberg's history of incidents.  Police reform was needed. 
Winter Dellenbach hoped the Council addressed the delay in releasing 
information about the K-9 incident and supported a less onerous solution to 
encrypted law enforcement communications.  Questions about incidents 
needed to be answered. 
Sunita de Tourreil suggested the Council implement audits of Police 
Department incidents and revisit the policy for qualified immunity.   
Emily 
Lacroix 
supported 
the 
call 
for 
increased 
transparency 
and 
accountability within the Police Department.  PERT included Police Officers 
who were not necessary and many times more harmful than helpful.  The 
Police Department needed to explore other solutions.   
Raven Malone felt the Council had done nothing to reform the Police 
Department.  There was no accountability or transparency in the Police 
Department.  Qualified immunity needed to end. 
Eva Tang remarked regarding litigation involving Officer Enberg and 
requested the Council hold him accountable for his actions. 
Ola Abiose concurred with comments regarding the K-9 incident.  The Palo 
Alto Police Department received a score of 48 percent on Campaign Zero's 
score card.  Use of drone surveillance was regressive, not progressive.   
Council Member Stone noted the scrutiny of law enforcement officers and 
the transparency required in law enforcement.  He inquired whether the 
Department objected to unencrypted communications over the main radio 
channel and encrypted communications for PII over a secondary channel. 
Chief Jonsen advised that absent the DOJ mandate, the Police Department 
did not object to unencrypted communications.  Not a single law 
enforcement agency found a viable option to encrypted communications.  
Technology was the most likely avenue for a viable option. 
Council Member Stone asked if the Police Department utilized a secondary 
channel that had to be encrypted to comply with the DOJ mandate. 
Chief Jonsen replied yes.  The Police Department utilized an unencrypted 
channel, but its use for PII was not allowed under the mandate. 
Council Member Stone requested clarification of the reasons for using an 
encrypted channel for routine communications that did not contain PII. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Chief Jonsen explained that most Police Department communications 
contained PII. 
April Wagner, Police Captain, reported three employees in the Dispatch 
Center handled more than 400 calls per day for different services.  A fourth 
employee was needed to answer 911 calls during peak hours.  A fifth 
employee was needed to staff a channel utilized solely for PII.  In addition, a 
Police Officer on patrol was unable to listen to multiple channels 
simultaneously and may miss emergency information broadcast on an 
alternate channel.  Large cities had the ability to hire sufficient dispatchers 
and staff patrols with two officers so that use of an unencrypted channel was 
possible. 
Council Member Stone inquired whether the Police Department was 
operating under the DOJ memorandum released in the fall of 2020. 
Ms. Wagner advised that the DOJ informed her that there was no legal 
exception for the public or press to listen to PII.  Policies were in place for 
quite a while, but digital communications were needed to implement them. 
Council Member Stone felt the mandate impeded the First Amendment rights 
of the press.  Alternatives to encrypted communications were needed.  At a 
minimum, the press needed to monitor police communications.  The Council 
or Policy and Services Committee (P&S) needed to develop a transparent 
policy that met the DOJ mandate and protected the public's right to access 
information. 
Vice Mayor Burt inquired about the status of Chief Jonsen's letter requesting 
a temporary rescission while Staff sought alternatives to encrypted 
communications, whether the rescission applied to State and/or Federal 
requirements, and about legislative changes needed at the federal level. 
Chief Jonsen indicated he sent a letter to the California DOJ requesting 
permission to utilize unencrypted communications until the end of the year 
while evaluating alternatives, but the DOJ had not yet responded.  The 
SVRIA Executive Director informed him of the complications caused by Palo 
Alto not using encrypted communications during a regional situation. 
Vice Mayor Burt inquired whether the Police Department was able to toggle 
between encrypted and unencrypted channels. 
Chief Jonsen answered that switching between two channels was very 
problematic.  Council Member Kou recently joined the SVRIA Board and was 
going to speak for Palo Alto in these matters. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt noted Council Members' interest in legislative reform, and 
subregional or regional collaboration was possible.  He asked if effective 
legislative reforms were identified. 
Chief Jonsen responded no.  With a new Attorney General, perhaps a 
conversation about reforms was an alternative. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, advised that a bill in the prior legislative session 
proposed a means through which members of certified news organizations 
were allowed to receive communications.  That bill died in session but 
offered an alternative.   
Vice Mayor Burt asked if Staff learned the reasons for the bill's failure from 
the City's lobbyist. 
Mr. Shikada related that the bill's author was no longer in the Legislature.  
Staff indicated the City's interest in the proposal in conversations with local 
media.   
Chantal Cotton Gains, Deputy City Manager, added that the City's advocate 
mentioned a few Legislators were potentially willing to consider the topic for 
the next session. 
Vice Mayor Burt suggested advocacy was possible in the current legislative 
session. 
Council Member Cormack recalled community members' positive comments 
regarding the Police Department's handling of protests in 2020.  She 
supported the media having access to Police Department communications.  
She requested the number of personnel who left the Department in 2020 
and the number of vacant positions at the end of 2020. 
Chief Jonsen indicated two Lieutenants, the Technical Services Director, and 
the Communications Manager were laid off, and 11 Police Officer and four 
Dispatcher positions were vacant.  Community Service Officers were reduced 
by two positions.   
Council Member Cormack inquired regarding the Social Psychological 
Answers to Real-world Questions (SPARQ). 
Andrew Binder, Assistant Chief, reported a survey was being prepared for 
the Police Department. 
Council Member Cormack requested an update regarding implementation of 
the Racial and Identity Profiling Act. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Ms. Wagner related that data was going to be collected through the new 
records management system.  Test data submissions were planned for the 
near future. 
Council Member Cormack asked when data was going to be input. 
Ms. Wagner advised that input prior to the end of the workday was the best 
practice. 
Council Member Cormack remarked that IPA reviews did not need to be the 
only emphasis.  Employees also needed to be encouraged to behave as 
expected.  She expressed interest in learning whether the right people were 
conducting welfare checks and about traffic stops for minor issues.  A Study 
Session regarding mental health calls was needed at some point.   
Council Member Filseth commented that the DOJ mandate did not seem to 
solve a problem that occurred in Palo Alto.  He inquired whether P&S 
planned to review the IPA's scope of work and audit plans. 
Mr. Shikada noted P&S was scheduled to review personnel-related items and 
the overall IPA contract with a presentation to the Council in the next 60 
days or so. 
Council Member Filseth supported the IPA's review of the incident with the 
K-9 unit.  Fast-tracking review of incidents, when warranted, was useful.   
Council Member Kou suggested sending a letter to determine the interest of 
SVRIA member agencies in legislation regarding encrypted communications. 
Mr. Shikada believed a discussion with SVRIA members was worthwhile.   
Chief Jonsen indicated each agency had its own perspective and hoped 
technology that met the needs of the community and the DOJ was 
developed. 
Council Member Kou agreed with the Police Department's use of technology, 
but a physical presence in the community was also needed.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if hate crimes were tracked.   
Chief Jonsen reported the vast majority of hate crimes were related to 
property damage, but an incident report was prepared for all calls.  Members 
of the public were encouraged to call the Police Department any time they 
felt at danger or at risk. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Council Member Tanaka stated the priority was to ensure residents felt safe 
and to stop crime as much as possible.  Other cities successfully 
implemented drone programs.  Some cities utilized fixed license plate 
readers (LPR) for property crimes, and he encouraged Chief Jonsen to 
explore such a program.  Transparency regarding body-camera recordings 
and reports was important as was responding to requests for public 
information.   
Chief Jonsen noted the effects of reduced staffing on proactive crime 
prevention.  A drone program and an LPR program were potentially valuable 
programs for the Police Department.   
Mayor DuBois wanted the Council to receive IPA reports more quickly.  He 
supported reversing the decision to encrypt communications immediately 
and seeking an alternative.  Technology that provided a flood of generic text 
messages was not helpful.  Text messaging PII to Police Officers was a 
possible alternative.  He wanted the Police Department to release body-
camera video daily and a Council review of redacted policies to determine if 
they needed to be redacted.  Perhaps releasing to the public aggregated 
reports of incidents that led to investigations was possible.  Noise and 
privacy issues were likely with a drone program.  Perhaps the Chief's 
Advisory Group could hold public meetings. 
Vice Mayor Burt supported agendizing an Action Item and expressed interest 
in a more immediate response to communications with the public. 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Council took a break at 6:41 P.M. and returned at 6:50 P.M. 
2. 
Discussion of Services for the Unhoused in Palo Alto. 
Chantal Cotton Gaines, Deputy City Manager, reported the item was before 
the Council in response to community interest and Council direction.  The 
County of Santa Clara (County) was working with many communities and 
providing direct services.   
Cathryn Kaminski, Santa Clara County Office of Supportive Housing Deputy 
Director, advised that the guiding values of the County's Community Plan to 
End Homelessness (Plan) were to raise the voices of people with lived 
experiences and to focus on policies and programs that reduced racial 
inequity and reversed the disproportionately high rates of people of color in 
the unhoused community.  The 2020 Plan was a roadmap for addressing 
homelessness over the next five years.  Strategies included addressing 
systemic factors that influenced the root causes and inflow into 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
homelessness, expanding homelessness prevention and housing programs to 
better meet the need, and improving the quality of life for unsheltered 
individuals and creating healthy neighborhoods for all.  From 2015 to 2019, 
the County helped more than 8,800 households resolve their homelessness, 
doubled the number of supportive housing units, doubled temporary housing 
and emergency shelter capacity, launched a new homelessness prevention 
system that served more than 1,500 households annually, led a community-
wide campaign that successfully housed more than 1,600 veterans, and 
engaged nearly 800 private landlords.  In addition, voters approved Measure 
A, a $950 million affordable housing bond.  Unfortunately, homelessness 
continued to grow.   
Ray Bramson, Destination Home Chief Operating Officer, indicated the new 
Plan called for reducing inflow into homelessness by 30 percent, housing 
20,000 people through the supportive housing system, expanding the 
homelessness prevention system to serve 2,500 people per year, doubling 
the temporary housing and shelter capacity, and addressing racial inequities 
present among unhoused people and families.  No one jurisdiction had the 
resources to eliminate homelessness.  The City of Milpitas funded case 
managers.  The City of Mountain View provided rapid rehousing subsidies.  
The City of San Jose funded a planner to review projects aligned with 
Measure A guidelines.  Measure A revenues funded 34 housing developments 
with more than 3,300 housing units.  In 2020, Destination Home, Facebook, 
and Local Initiatives Support Corporation (LISC) launched a $150 million 
community fund for affordable housing projects.   
Ms. Kaminski related that Project Homekey was acquiring hotels to convert 
to permanent and temporary housing. 
Philip Dah, Opportunity Center Director, described the Opportunity Center's 
program that provided one-time assistance to prevent homelessness.  
Emergency shelters in Palo Alto were the Heart and Home Collaborative and 
Hotel de Zink.  He requested the City explore permanent funding for Project 
Homekey. 
Rachel Tanner, Planning and Development Services Assistant Director, 
shared the two Safe Parking approaches utilized in the City and highlighted 
the collaboration with Stanford University and other community partners.  
One permit was issued for a congregation-based Safe Parking Program, and 
two applications were pending.   
Amber Stime, Move Mountain View, reported children enjoyed playing in the 
fenced area of the Safe Parking lot located on Geng Road.  Children's Library 
and community members were creating a library for the site.  The Safe 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Parking lot provided a sense of safety for clients and facilitated a move to 
permanent housing.   
Meghan Swezey Fogarty, Stanford University Community Engagement, 
advised that her position focused on building strategies to enable Stanford 
University's research and teaching resources to more effectively address 
regional issues.  Last fall, Stanford University along with community partners 
launched a monthly meeting of stakeholders concerned about vehicle 
dwellers.  Stanford University provided in-kind support for a survey and 
collaborated with community partners to host a community day on 
February 27, 2021.   
Ms. Tanner hoped to present the Council with a permanent Ordinance for 
congregation-based Safe Parking sites in August 2021. 
Minka van der Zwaag, Human Services Manager, indicated the City worked 
with a variety of organizations to provide a mix of vital services for the 
unhoused through Human Services Resource Allocation Process (HSRAP) and 
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funding.   
Ms. Cotton Gaines suggested the Council discuss vehicle dwelling policy and 
availability, support for the Plan, housing and shelter development options, 
outreach and case workers, and resources required for follow-up.   
Rebecca Eisenberg noted the City provided no shelter beds and a conflict 
between her and Staff's statements regarding Project Homekey.  She alleged 
that the Staff Report contained inaccurate information regarding Project 
Homekey. 
Angie Evans remarked that notifying vehicle dwellers of plans to tow their 
vehicles was not acceptable.  Building stable, affordable housing for those 
who needed it was imperative. 
1646***704 supported the Safe Parking Program and its goals but 
expressed concerns regarding lot monitoring and enforcement. 
David Grossman believed quantitative measures of the successes and 
failures of the Safe Parking Program were needed and proposed the City 
issue comprehensive reports of successes and problems.  The City needed to 
emulate Mountain View's Safe Parking Program. 
Grace Mah suggested the City notify residents located within half a mile of 
an applicant's address of the application for a Safe Parking permit.  The 
$600 fee to appeal a decision on a Safe Parking permit seemed prohibitively 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
high.  She inquired about metrics and the number of applications for the 
Safe Parking Pilot Program. 
Aram James issued a verbal request for public information to learn the entity 
that authorized ticketing of vehicle dwellers.  Safe Parking Programs that 
allowed 24/7 parking were needed.  The City was woefully behind in helping 
the homeless. 
Valerie Sarma opposed the proposed apartment complex project on 
Wellesley Street because the project did not serve future residents or the 
community of College Terrace.   
Roberta Alquist, Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, 
requested the Council direct the Planning Commission to cease the 
development 
and 
approval 
of 
projects 
converting 
housing 
into 
condominiums.  The City needed rent control, shelters, and low-income 
housing.   
Kelsey Banes encouraged the Council to support the Plan with timely and 
substantive policy changes.   
Kevin Ma noted the City did not fund a single case worker for the unhoused 
community.  Requiring vehicle dwellers to move every three days was 
inhumane.  Renter protections prevented homelessness.   
Rohin Ghosh commented that the City had a responsibility to serve all 
residents, reduce barriers to services, and encourage affordable housing. 
Sunita de Tourreil, speaking as an individual, proposed students tutor 
children living at the Safe Parking site. 
Wendy Yu proposed a residency requirement so that the Safe Parking 
Program served Palo Alto community members only.  She expressed concern 
that a high concentration of Safe Parking lots was going to be located on 
Middlefield because of the number of religious organizations in the area. 
Alan Miller recommended the documentary "Fight for the Soul of Seattle" 
and noted the use of buzz words and shaming. 
Valerie Stinger, speaking as an individual, remarked that 55 to 60 percent of 
social services funding was expended for homeless services in 2019-2020, 
and these sources of funding were not sustainable.  A more strategic 
approach to homelessness was needed.  The Council needed to learn which 
programs served which needs the best.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Carolyn W suggested background checks as a best practice for the Safe 
Parking Program. 
Mayor DuBois requested the expectation of additional funding for Project 
Homekey. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines related that funding was included in the Governor's 
proposed budget.   
Consuelo Hernandez, Santa Clara County Office of Supportive Housing 
Director, added that a proposal needed to be ready when Project Homekey 
opened for applications.  In 2020, a notice of funding was released on July 
14, and the deadline to submit an application was less than three weeks 
later.  The County received its first award for a Project Homekey site by 
August 25, 2020. 
Mr. Bramson noted the proposed allocation for 2021-2022 $750 million. 
Mayor DuBois wanted the City to engage more with the County.  Perhaps the 
Council wished to utilize some COVID-19 relief funding to increase human 
services funding.  Mountain View's ban on recreational vehicles (RV) became 
effective soon and was likely to impact surrounding cities.  Projects for 
assisted living facilities and housing over City parking lots were ways to 
increase housing.  Multilingual communications with vehicle dwellers were 
needed.  The survey was going to be important for understanding the 
different populations and needs.  There was an opportunity for a special 
needs housing project in Palo Alto.  The development of temporary Safe 
Parking lots was incredibly slow.  Perhaps some owners of hotels in need of 
repair were interested in selling their properties to the County for conversion 
to housing.   
Ms. Hernandez advised that the County was working with Mountain View to 
convert a hotel to housing with the use of Measure A funding.  In Milpitas, a 
146-unit extended stay hotel was converted to 132 permanent housing 
units.  Measure A funding of $21 million and a Homekey Project grant of 
$29.2 million funded the two projects. 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether the goal was to reduce 
homelessness inflow by 30 percent while the inflow was increasing 100 
percent annually. 
Ms. Kaminski clarified that goals were to reduce inflow and to increase the 
number of people housed over the next five years.   
Council Member Filseth asked about ways to balance inflow and outflow. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Ms. Kaminski advised that additional housing and a targeted campaign 
resulted in a reduction of the total number of homeless veterans. 
Council Member Filseth inquired about changes in the homeless population 
over the past decade. 
Ms. Van der Zwaag indicated the last two point-in-time (PIT) counts 
reflected an increase from 279 to 313 in the Palo Alto homeless population.  
Approximately six years ago, the population decreased.  The population 
ebbed and flowed with the economy and available housing options.   
Ms. Kaminski stated the survey was useful in determining the homeless 
population and the level of need. 
Council Member Cormack was interested in seeing the strategies map 
actions with funds and time.  She requested comments regarding allocation 
of time and funding across the three strategies. 
Ms. Kaminski related that the strategies were a roadmap for potential 
opportunities.  The Council needed to allocate resources in each area. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the County tracked expenditures for each 
strategy. 
Ms. Kaminski explained that spending was tracked by affordable housing 
development, crisis response, emergency shelter, outreach, and those types 
of things. 
Ms. Hernandez added that in-kind opportunities were available for cities. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the homeless population count included 
vehicle dwellers. 
Ms. Van der Zwaag reported the PIT count attempted to reach people living 
in shelters, on the street, and in vehicles. 
Council Member Cormack supported the City exploring the conversion of a 
hotel to housing and providing public land for housing.  Ms. Tanner was 
aware of the concern about background checks for participants in the Safe 
Parking Program.  She inquired whether the City previously funded a 
program that provided phones or phone service to the homeless. 
Ms. Van der Zwaag replied no, but it was discussed.  In some instances, 
service providers gave phones donated by community members to clients.  
Phones were a necessity for case workers to contact homeless clients, 
especially during the pandemic. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Council Member Cormack appreciated Staff and partners for providing 
information in a structure that helped the Council consider gaps and ways to 
fill the gaps. 
Council Member Stone asked if shelters for families were located in Palo Alto. 
Ms. Van der Zwaag answered no. 
Council Member Stone requested the location of a family shelter near Palo 
Alto. 
Mr. Dah advised that the nearest was located in Menlo Park, and others were 
located in San Mateo and San Jose. 
Ms. Kaminski added that a family shelter was located in Sunnyvale, and a 
cold-weather program was located in Mountain View. 
Council Member Stone inquired about a nonprofit organization that 
conducted outreach to unhoused and mental health communities. 
Ms. Van der Zwaag indicated the Opportunity Center conducted case 
management with people in the shelter.  The Downtown Streets Team 
conducted outreach to bring people into its program.  Momentum for Mental 
Health previously provided outreach once per week in Palo Alto.  The City did 
not have a contract for street outreach with any service provider through 
HSRAP or CDBG programs.   
Council Member Stone asked if Staff was aware of a provider of street 
outreach. 
Ms. Van der Zwaag suggested contacting current providers that were not 
funded for street outreach. 
Council Member Stone requested possible reasons for only 14 persons being 
sheltered in Palo Alto at the time of the 2019 PIT count. 
Ms. Van der Zwaag explained that the 14 sheltered persons were living in 
the Hotel de Zink.  The County's report for the 2019 count provided data 
about Palo Alto residents living in shelters outside Palo Alto.   
Council Member Stone requested the State and local laws that addressed 
abandoned vehicles and vehicles parked on streets for more than 72 hours. 
Andrew Binder, Assistant Police Chief, agreed to provide the information at a 
later time. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Council Member Stone felt increasing funding for human services was 
extremely important.  The City needed a strategic plan to address 
homelessness. 
Vice Mayor Burt concurred with comments regarding the need for a strategic 
plan and to increase HSRAP funding.  He inquired whether the County 
considered micro-grants for religious organizations that provided temporary 
Safe Parking lots.   
Ms. Hernandez replied no.  Efforts were directed to leveraging nonprofit 
partners. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if older hotels were surveyed to determine their 
interest in selling the property for conversion to housing or providing 
temporary housing. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines reported Staff contacted hotels and was working to 
determine the feasibility of the hotels. 
Vice Mayor Burt believed some of the owners may find an offer attractive.  If 
the City had available property, it was on a fast track for Measure A funding.  
As part of the project to remake the golf course, 10 acres was set aside for 
playing fields.  He encouraged Staff to look at the site as a potential Safe 
Parking lot.  He suggested the Council consider increasing Development 
Impacts Fees and implementing a business tax as potential funding sources.   
Council Member Kou urged Ms. Stime to work with residents to address 
concerns about the Safe Parking lots.  Staff needed to reach out to residents 
who owned and occupied below-market-rate (BMR) housing about resources 
for repairs and maintenance.  Housing on City-owned surface parking lots 
was a possibility.  She inquired about COVID-19 vaccinations for vehicle 
dwellers.   
Ms. Stime advised that Valley Health had been to the Geng Road site twice, 
and staff notified participants of dates Valley Health planned to be at the 
site. 
Mr. Dah indicated vaccination clinics were held at the Opportunity Center on 
the past three Fridays.   
Council Member Kou asked if children were attending school. 
Ms. Stime answered yes. 
Council Member Kou asked if Hotel de Zink provided temporary housing for 
families. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Mr. Dah responded no, only single adults. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether the problem with repeat offenders 
at the Opportunity Center was resolved. 
Mr. Dah replied yes.  After speaking with the Police Department and 
neighbors, the people loitering in front of the building were no longer 
present. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed with public comments regarding the fee to 
appeal a Safe Parking permit decision, the potential for a concentration of 
temporary Safe Parking sites on Middlefield, background checks, monitoring, 
enforcement, and metrics.  The Council needed to understand the root 
causes of homelessness in order to address them.   
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None. 
Oral Communications 
Fred Balin, speaking for Melanie Grondel, Diane Finkelstein, Doria Summa, 
Annette Ross, and William Heaton, recommended the public view the 
documentary "The Chinese Exclusion Act" and read "The White Devil's 
Daughters."   
Aram James appreciated the Council proposing an Action Item regarding 
police reform and questioning Chief Jonsen.  The Police Department had one 
active African-American Police Officer.   
Rob Levitsky thanked the Council for modifying the Castilleja School 
expansion project and indicated residents were going to judge Castilleja's 
integrity by the way it treated Tree Number 89. 
Hank Edson urged the Council to reject the apartment project on Wellesley 
Street; to permit construction on single-family residential (R-1) parcels 
owned by people who committed to occupying the home for two years after 
construction; and limit titleholders to one property per neighborhood. 
Bill Ross complimented Utilities Staff for repairs to facilities on March 27, 
2021 and inquired if the facilities had redundant sewer pumps.  Without 
redundant pumps, the City was not able to address critical issues of fire and 
life safety.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Keith Bennett, Save Palo Alto's Groundwater, commented that dewatering 
regulations needed to be modified to quantitatively limit groundwater 
discharge.   
Rebecca Eisenberg concurred with Mr. James', Mr. Levitsky's, and Mr. 
Bennett's comments.  The City had no right to grant an amended Conditional 
Use Permit (CUP) unless Castilleja demonstrated a public benefit.   
Council took a break at 9:22 P.M. and returned at 9:32 P.M. 
Minutes Approval 
1. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the March 15 and March 22, 2021 City 
Council Meetings. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to 
approve the Action Minutes for the March 15 and March 22, 2021 City 
Council Meetings. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kou to approve Agenda Item Numbers 4 and 5. 
4. 
Approval of the Traffic Data Collection Surveillance Use Policy and 
Approval of a Contract With Traffic Data Service, Inc. for a Total 
Not-to-Exceed Amount of $200,000 to Provide On-call Traffic Data 
Collection Services. 
5. 
Ordinance 5519 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Adopting an Administrative Amendment to the 2019 California Fire 
Code, Palo Alto Municipal Code Section 15.04.075 (Definitions Added 
to Section 202) (FIRST READING:  March 15, 2021 PASSED: 7-0).” 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported the County of Santa Clara (County) 
Public Health Department announced a growing number of COVID-19 
variants were present in the county.  On April 1, 2021, California residents 
aged 50 and older were eligible for the vaccine.  Residents aged 16 and 
older were eligible on April 15, 2021.  COVID-19 testing was available every 
Tuesday, every Wednesday, and on April 16, 2021.  Children's Library was 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
going to reopen by appointment only on April 13, 2021.  An online survey 
regarding extension of the parklet and street closures on and off University 
Avenue and California Avenue was available.  The May Fete celebration was 
scheduled for May 1-8, 2021.  The Highway 101 Bike Bridge was awaiting 
permit approvals to install the trusses.   
Action Items 
6. 
Discussion and Selection of Members for an Advisory Housing Element 
Working Group to Assist With the Preparation of a new Housing 
Element. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, reviewed the 
Council's direction to Staff on February 1, 2021.  Staff received 80 
applications for the Housing Element Working Group (Working Group).  An 
at-places memorandum organized the applicants into four groups.  The 
Working Group was going to identify housing sites and draft housing policies 
and programs.  Staff proposed a kickoff meeting for the Housing Element 
Update on May 10, 2021 as well as a Joint Study Session for the Council and 
Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC).  The first Working Group 
meeting was tentatively scheduled for May 6, 2021. 
Aram James asked if Working Group meetings were going to be subject to 
the Brown Act.  The Working Group needed three or four unhoused persons.   
Anya Bida introduced herself as an applicant for the Working Group. 
John Hickey introduced himself as an applicant for the Working Group and 
shared his experience with planning. 
Arthur Keller suggested the Working Group be subject to the Brown Act and 
prepare its meeting agendas. 
Jean Snider hoped to be selected for the Working Group and shared her 
experience with land management. 
Jessica von Borck related the value she could add to the Working Group. 
Kelsey Banes, Peninsula for Everyone, recommended the Working Group 
reflect the community's diversity and include young people, renters, and 
people of color.   
Chris Labonte introduced himself as an applicant for the Working Group. 
Tim McKenzie believed the Working Group needed to include renters and 
was surprised to hear Stanford University employees offer to utilize their 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
professional teams for civic work.  An apartment complex was more 
appropriate than a parking garage on California Avenue.   
Jeffrey Hook stated the world's population was likely to decrease by 1 billion 
by the end of the century.  Converting commercial space to residential 
reduced demand and increased supply.   
Anna Toledano requested the inclusion of renters on the Working Group.   
Council Member Cormack inquired about the role of the alternate members. 
Mr. Lait explained that the alternates were intended to replace members 
who resigned from the Working Group. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about the concept of affirmatively 
furthering fair housing. 
Mr. Lait read the definition contained in State law.  Additional aspects were 
attempting to include those who typically were not represented in housing 
issues and drafting a chapter that identified constraints and barriers to fair 
housing and added or modified policies to create more equitable housing for 
all. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated Staff's use of a broad range of 
communications to announce the Working Group and translation of 
applications into Spanish and Chinese.  Her criteria for Working Group 
members included the ability to understand data and rules. 
Vice Mayor Burt wanted the Working Group to reflect the breadth of 
perspectives and backgrounds in the community, have a mixture of 
experiences and expertise, and focus on problem solving.  Fifteen members 
and three alternates were acceptable. 
Mayor DuBois expressed concern that the Working Group's work was going 
to be constrained by the City's large allocation of housing units.  Perhaps the 
Council wished to consider a number less than 6,000 units.  Criteria for 
members included problem-solving, data analysis, ability to collaborate, 
social media behavior, diversity, previous service on Boards, Committees, 
and Commissions, and residency in Palo Alto.   
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member 
Stone to: 
A. 
Appoint a Housing Element Working Group as follows: 
i. 
Appoint the following people to the Working Group: 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
1. 
Anupa Bajwa 
2. 
Sheena Chin 
3. 
Aishetu Fatima Dozie 
4. 
Hamilton Hitchings 
5. 
Rahsan Hosgur Karahan 
6. 
Kathryn Jordan 
7. 
Arthur Keller 
8. 
Sheryl Klein 
9. 
Ed Lauing 
10. 
Jennifer Liu 
11. 
Pat Markevitch 
12. 
Keith Reckdahl 
13. 
Jean Snider 
14. 
Jessenia Solorio 
15. 
Randolph Tsien 
ii. 
Appoint the following people as Alternates: 
1. 
Jessica von Borck 
2. 
Dina Bartello 
B. 
Direct Staff to coordinate a joint City Council and Planning and 
Transportation Commission Housing Element Kick Off Meeting, 
tentatively scheduled for May 10, 2021. 
Council Member Filseth commented on the challenges of satisfying State 
requirements and community priorities.  The task for the Working Group was 
analytical.  He shared the Housing Ad Hoc Committee's analysis of 
membership.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Council Member Stone added that the Housing Ad Hoc Committee wanted 
members who were able to analyze data, understand long-term implications 
of decisions, collaborate, and debate in a civil manner.   
Council Member Cormack did not believe the list was balanced.  Social media 
posts were not part of her criteria.  She did not anticipate that the Housing 
Ad Hoc Committee's role included review of applicants.   
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
XX to replace Jean Snider with Arthur Liberman. 
AMENDMENT FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
Council Member Kou concurred with many of the Housing Ad Hoc 
Committee's criteria.   
Vice Mayor Burt preferred to allow Council Members to add applicants to the 
list in the Motion and vote on each.  The applicants with a majority were 
going to be selected for the Working Group.  If the number of applicants 
with a majority vote exceeded 15, Council Members were going to vote to 
remove applicants. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by 
Council Member XX to: 
A. 
Appoint a Housing Element Working Group as follows: 
i. 
Appoint the following people to the Working Group: 
1. 
Jessica von Borck 
2. 
Antonia Mendoza 
3. 
Donald Barr 
4. 
Jessenia Solorio 
5. 
Gregg Johnson 
6. 
Kevin Ma 
7. 
Helen Carnes 
8. 
Robert Chun 
9. 
Aishetu Fatima Dozie 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
10. 
Lisa Ratner 
11. 
Keith Reckdahl 
12. 
Jessica Resmini 
13. 
Cara Silver 
14. 
Mele Tupou 
15. 
Brigham Wilson 
ii. 
Appoint the following people as Alternates: 
1. 
Peter Baltay 
2. 
Raven Malone 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by 
Council Member Cormack to direct the City Council to email their selections 
to the City Clerk to be tallied for majority prior to appointment. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that the proposed methods to select 
members were permissible. 
Beth Minor, City Clerk, indicated tallying the votes was likely to require 10 to 
20 minutes. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED:  3-4 DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone no 
Mayor DuBois reviewed the list of applicants in relation to the stakeholder 
categories. 
Vice Mayor Burt did not agree with the process as it was not appropriate.  He 
moved to reconsider the Substitute Motion. 
Ms. Stump advised that a Council Member who voted in the majority was 
allowed to move to reconsider a Motion.  Vice Mayor Burt did not vote in the 
majority on the Substitute Motion. 
AMENDMENT:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to add Cara Silver, Daniel Mendez, Raven Malone, Jessica Resmini 
and Justine Burt to the Motion Part A. i. for the purpose of voting to appoint 
members to the Housing Element Working Group. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt felt many of the applicants on the list were good, but the 
Housing Ad Hoc Committee's mandate did not include proposing applicants 
for the Working Group. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the full list of applicants captured the 
senior demographic. 
Council Member Filseth indicated five were in the age range of 56 to 70, and 
one was in the over 70 age range. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE AMENDMENT WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add Steven Levy to the list. 
Mayor DuBois asked if the Amendment intended to add applicants to the list 
but not appoint them to the Working Group. 
Vice Mayor Burt answered correct.  Ultimately, the Council was going to vote 
on each applicant. 
AMENDMENT RESTATED:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council 
Member Cormack to add Cara Silver, Daniel Mendez, Raven Malone, Jessica 
Resmini, Justine Burt, and Stephen Levy to the Motion Part A. i. for the 
purpose of voting to appoint members to the Housing Element Working 
Group. 
Council Member Kou believed some of the applicants in the Amendment had 
conflicts of interest.  One was involved in discussions with the Association of 
Bay Area Governments (ABAG) regarding the Regional Housing Needs 
Allocation (RHNA), and one owned a business building or designing 
accessory dwelling units (ADU).   
AMENDMENT FAILED:  3-4 DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone no  
Mayor DuBois commented that a majority of Council Members had to pass a 
Motion, and a majority of Council Members appeared to support the Motion.  
The process for selecting members for the Working Group was not ideal. 
Vice Mayor Burt supported most of the applicants on the list, but the process 
was wrong.  The applicants who Council Member Kou indicated had conflicts 
of interest did not have legal conflicts.  The list contained applicants who 
worked for affordable housing or Stanford University.   
Mr. Lait reported none of the applicants appeared to have experience 
developing market-rate multifamily housing or to represent Palo Alto Unified 
School District (PAUSD). 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
Council Member Kou related that experience with below-market-rate (BMR) 
housing was more important than market-rate housing. 
Mayor DuBois suggested the Council proceed with the vote and request 
PAUSD Staff attend Working Group meetings and report to the PAUSD Board 
of Education (Board). 
Council Member Tanaka concurred with Vice Mayor Burt's comments 
regarding the process. 
MOTION RESTATED:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council 
Member Stone to: 
A. 
Appoint a Housing Element Working Group as follows: 
i. 
Appoint the following people to the Working Group: 
1. 
Anupa Bajwa 
2. 
Sheena Chin 
3. 
Aishetu Fatima Dozie 
4. 
Hamilton Hitchings 
5. 
Rahsan Hosgur Karahan 
6. 
Kathryn Jordan 
7. 
Arthur Keller 
8. 
Sheryl Klein 
9. 
Ed Lauing 
10. 
Jennifer Liu 
11. 
Pat Markevitch 
12. 
Keith Reckdahl 
13. 
Jean Snider 
14. 
Jessenia Solorio 
15. 
Randolph Tsien 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/05/2021 
ii. 
Appoint the following people as Alternates: 
1. 
Jessica von Borck 
2. 
Dina Bartello 
B. 
Direct Staff to coordinate a joint City Council and Planning and 
Transportation Commission Housing Element Kick Off Meeting, 
tentatively scheduled for May 10, 2021. 
MOTION PASSED:  4-3 Burt, Cormack, Tanaka no  
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack announced she was appointed to the Board of 
California Cities formerly known as the League of Cities Women's Caucus. 
Council Member Tanaka thanked Council Members for supporting Council 
Member Kou and him by attending the Asian hate rally on Sunday.  Another 
rally was planned for May 1, 2021. 
Vice Mayor Burt reported the Caltrain Local Policy Maker Group (LPMG) 
received an update regarding scenario planning and was probably going to 
consider forming a subcommittee for design alternatives and pursuing 
funding for grade separating the Caltrain Corridor.  The Santa Clara Valley 
Transportation Authority (VTA) Board was ready to make decisions 
pertaining to CEO recruitment, Assembly Bill (AB) 1081, and Measure B 
funding.   
Council Member Stone encouraged the community to get their COVID-19 
vaccinations.   
Mayor DuBois expressed interest in resuming Town Hall meetings.  Several 
May Fete activities were scheduled for May 1, 2021. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned in honor of the Stanford 
Women’s Basketball Championship at 11:28 P.M. 
