CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 24 
Special Meeting 
June 1, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:01 P.M. 
Participating Remotely:  Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka     
arrived at 6:21 P.M. 
Absent: 
 
Special Orders of the Day 
1. 
Proclamation Honoring Gunn High School Football Coach Jason Miller. 
Council Member Kou read the Proclamation into the record. 
NO ACTION TAKEN. 
2. 
Proclamation Honoring Gunn High School Titans Football Team. 
Mayor DuBois read the Proclamation into the record. 
Council Member Stone congratulated the team and Coach Miller.  Coach 
Miller's ability to encourage students to be global citizens and contributing 
members of the community was impressive.   
Council Member Cormack found Coach Miller's approach to teamwork to be 
clever.  Hopefully, the community was going to be able to watch games in 
the fall. 
Vice Mayor Burt noted the incredible accomplishment of turning around the 
football program.  The players were going to carry the lessons learned over 
the past year into their lives beyond football.   
Don Austin, Palo Alto Unified School District (PAUSD) Superintendent, 
thanked the Council for recognizing Coach Miller and the football team.  The 
players were prepared and played with class.  Creating future great citizens 
was a win better than a 5-0 season.   
Jason Miller, Gunn High School Football Coach, appreciated the Council 
recognizing the team.  Because of the pandemic, opportunities for 
recognition were rare.  He appreciated the support of Dr. Austin and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Principals Lawrence and Stratton.  His players understood that the 
opportunity to play football after high school came with the expectation of 
academic success.   
Wendy Stratton, Gunn High School Principal, acknowledged Coach Miller's 
leadership and caring manner with his players and peers.   
NO ACTION TAKEN. 
Study Session 
3. 
Discussion of the Format for Meetings of the City Council and Other 
Public Bodies Potentially Beginning August 2021. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, noted multiple departments were involved with 
the planning and production of Council, Board, Commission, and Committee 
meetings.   
Darren Numoto, Interim Director Information Technology, reported the 
Governor may revoke emergency orders on June 15, 2021, which was going 
to reinstitute Brown Act requirements for public meetings.  Council 
procedures 
discouraged 
Council 
Members 
from 
participating 
via 
teleconference and limited their use of teleconferencing to three occasions 
per year.  However, the public and Staff were allowed to participate 
remotely in meetings.  Three potential formats for future meetings were 
Council, Staff, and public participating in person only; Council, Staff, and 
others participating in person only with the public participating in person or 
remotely; and the majority of Council participating in person, a minority 
participating remotely, and Staff, the public, and others participating in 
person or remotely.  If the Council wished, it was possible to replace the 
existing monitors with large freestanding monitors on each side of the dais.   
Rebecca Eisenberg remarked that the Council's decision was going to reflect 
the importance it placed on transparency and democracy.  She appreciated 
Staff's recommendation for Option 3.   
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of Option 3, the hybrid 
model. 
Mr. Numoto advised that Zoom was going to be the primary platform for 
Option 3 with Council Members present in Chambers.  The dais laptops were 
going to provide the Zoom video similar to Council Members' current view.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Council Member Cormack suggested the video show in-person Council 
Members interacting instead of Council Members looking off-screen while 
talking. 
Mr. Numoto indicated screens were going to show the dais as well as close-
ups of Council Members.  Council Members were allowed to look into the 
camera or at each other when speaking.   
Council Member Cormack noted mask requirements for in-person attendees 
were not mentioned in the Staff Report.  Options 2 and 3 allowed greater 
public participation.  She inquired regarding the procedure for in-person and 
remote public speakers.   
Beth Minor, City Clerk, related that in-person public speakers were probably 
going to speak one after another as were remote public speakers.   
Council Member Cormack asked if Council Members or the City was going to 
provide laptops and if there were guidelines for use of laptops during 
meetings.   
Mr. Numoto  stated the laptop screen was going to provide a view similar to 
the current Zoom experience.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether it was possible for Council 
Members to utilize the laptops for email and internet searches during 
meetings.   
Mr. Numoto advised that the functionality of laptops was going to be limited 
to minimize support issues during meetings.   
Council Member Cormack understood the City was going to provide the 
laptops. 
Council Member Stone appreciated Council Member Cormack's concerns 
regarding connectivity to the public and Staff during meetings.  Zoom 
worked very well when everyone used the same format.  Connecting with 
two audiences, one in person and one in Zoom, was difficult.  He supported 
allowing the public to engage remotely and in person.  He inquired regarding 
the "others" mentioned in the Staff Report. 
Mr. Numoto stated consultants and vendors. 
Council Member Stone noted the benefits of Staff participating in meetings 
remotely and asked if it was possible for Staff and the public to participate 
either remotely or in person.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Mr. Numoto indicated Option 3 allowed Council Members, Staff, and the 
public to choose between remote and in-person attendance at meetings.  
The goal was to integrate Zoom into the usual Chambers recording so that 
one person was not continuously on camera.   
Council Member Stone inquired whether it was possible to display everyone 
but Council Members on the dais laptops.   
Mr. Numoto indicated that was a possibility.  
Council Member Stone requested the additional cost of Option 3, including 
equipment and staff time. 
Mr. Numoto explained that the current audiovisual (AV) equipment located in 
the Chambers was very old; therefore, the cost was primarily for new 
equipment that accommodated a hybrid environment.   
Council Member Filseth inquired whether new AV equipment was less costly 
than the previous proposal for new equipment. 
Mr. Numoto clarified that the current proposal was an interim phase to a full 
redesign of equipment in the Council Chamber.  This proposal was going to 
reduce the overall cost of the redesign, and new technology was going to be 
leveraged in the redesign.   
Council Member Filseth asked if the two large monitors were going to replace 
the monitor located behind the dais. 
Mr. Numoto answered yes, in the interim phase.  Staff planned to present a 
new proposal for a redesign of Chamber equipment. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the differences between Zoom and 
other software, such as Skype. 
Mr. Numoto explained that Zoom enabled streaming of meetings on YouTube 
and Midpen Media Center.  Zoom's meeting format allowed video feeds of 
public speakers, but meeting management was more difficult in meeting 
format.  Other brands of software were targeted to person-to-person 
communications.   
Council Member Kou requested the rationale for the limit on the number of 
meetings during which Council Members were allowed to participate 
remotely. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that prior to instituting a limit, the 
Council procedures required Council Members to have an emergency to 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
participate remotely.  In changing the procedure, the Council recognized 
that emergencies occurred at the last minute, and it was not possible to 
fulfill noticing requirements.  Previously, remote attendance meant Council 
Members participated via telephone, and they were often difficult to hear.   
Vice Mayor Burt concurred with Staff's recommendation of Option 3.  There 
were tradeoffs to allowing remote participation, but overall remote 
participation was a benefit.  He asked if Staff planned trial runs of the new 
equipment and software. 
Mr. Numoto answered yes.   
Vice Mayor Burt inquired whether Zoom's meeting format allowed a view of 
the full dais. 
Mr. Numoto reported the equipment's function determined the view, not the 
software.  The equipment did allow a view of the dais and individual Council 
Members.   
Vice Mayor Burt remarked that some of the Brown Act's requirements 
needed to be changed.  Remote participation was going to expand public 
access.  The City and the League of California Cities needed to advocate for 
legislation that helped local governments function with remote participation. 
Mayor DuBois asked if fully remote meetings were an option. 
Ms. Stump replied yes.  However, once the Governor's emergency 
suspension of Brown Act provisions ended, Council Members were required 
to publish the physical locations from which they participated and to allow 
members of the public to participate from the remote locations.   
Mayor DuBois inquired about the possibility of utilizing Zoom's "raised hand" 
feature for Council Member votes rather than roll call votes. 
Ms. Stump reported the emergency order required roll call votes probably to 
provide a clear record and transparency.   
Mayor DuBois asked if Staff planned to utilize the laptop microphone or a 
separate microphone for Council Members. 
Mr. Numoto related that tests with the existing dais microphones were 
promising. 
Mayor DuBois expressed concern that the proposed monitors were not going 
to be legible from the rear of the Council Chamber.  He inquired whether the 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
proposal was a temporary solution to redesigning AV equipment in the 
Chamber. 
Mr. Numoto responded yes.  A redesign was necessary to upgrade 
equipment and to comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA). 
Mayor DuBois asked if it was possible to utilize the existing monitor with the 
two proposed monitors. 
Mr. Numoto answered yes.   
Mayor DuBois commented that he referred to Staff Reports and his meeting 
notes during meetings.  Therefore, he did not support limiting the 
functionality of dais laptops unless Council Members were allowed to utilize a 
personal laptop. 
Mr. Numoto explained that the laptop was presented to depict the monitor in 
front of each Council Member.  Staff was exploring the use of a monitor with 
a small computer behind it or an all-in-one monitor.   
Mayor DuBois favored a hybrid of Options 2 and 3 wherein only Council 
Members were required to be present in the Chambers.  Eliminating travel 
time for consultants was going to be a cost savings for the City.  He 
proposed reducing the number of Staff needed to manage meetings by 
utilizing the Vice Mayor.  He asked Council Members to consider allowing 
members of the public to be visible and to share presentations when 
participating remotely and requesting remote members of the public to 
provide their names, addresses, and email addresses. 
Ms. Stump advised that requesting information was possible, but requiring 
information was not possible. 
Mayor DuBois indicated rules were needed for members of the public.  He 
preferred Council Members attend meetings in person.  He inquired 
regarding special requirements for Council Members participating remotely 
from outside Palo Alto versus from Palo Alto. 
Ms. Stump related that she needed to review the rules. 
Mayor DuBois noted meeting management was challenging through Zoom.   
Council Member Cormack asked if hybrid meetings were going to be possible 
for the Council's final two meetings in June 2021. 
Mr. Shikada reported Staff did not believe the state of emergency was going 
to be lifted on June 15, 2021 when the tier system ended. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Council Member Cormack suggested Staff place multiple devices around the 
monitor during trial runs in order to consider whether the monitor was a 
distraction.  The monitor diminished her ability to focus on the person 
speaking.   
NO ACTION TAKEN. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor DuBois reported Staff requested continuation of Agenda Item Number 
9 to June 7, 2021. 
Council took a break at 6:03 P.M. and returned at 6:16 P.M. 
Oral Communications 
None. 
Minutes Approval 
4. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the May 17 and May 18, 2021 City 
Council Meetings. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth 
to approve the Action Minutes for the May 17 and May 18, 2021 City Council 
Meetings. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-0 Tanaka absent 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 5. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Stone to approve Agenda Item Number 5. 
5. 
Ordinance 5523 and Ordinance 5524 Responding to State Housing Bills 
Regarding Density Bonus and Affordable Housing, Environmental 
Assessment: Exempt Pursuant to California Environmental Quality Act 
(CEQA) Guidelines Section 15061(b)(3) (FIRST READING:  May 18, 
2021 PASSED: 7-0). 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Kou no, Tanaka absent 
Council Member Kou remarked that it was going to cause even more overall 
jobs/housing imbalance without providing more affordable housing.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported the June 7 and 22, 2021 Council 
Agendas contained items related to reopening.  Staff anticipated Cal/OSHA 
releasing its reopening requirements on June 3, 2021.  The golf shop and 
Baylands Café at the Baylands Golf Links were open.  One-way trails in open 
space preserves were returning to two-way travel on June 2, 2021.  Magical 
Bridge was open with no capacity limits.  Mitchell Park, Rinconada, and 
Children's Libraries were open, and computer use was available.  US-101 
was going to be closed overnight June 5-6, 2021 for installation of the Bike 
Bridge.  An invitation-only ground-breaking ceremony for the Public Safety 
Building was planned for June 2, 2021.  Members of the public were invited 
to watch the ceremony on YouTube.  Fireworks were illegal in Palo Alto and 
surrounding communities, and the community was encouraged to report 
sounds of fireworks or suspected gunfire.  Fire stations were secure drop-off 
locations for fireworks.  Changes were being made to permit and inspection 
procedures for solar installations.  The City was hosting a community 
meeting on June 9, 2021 regarding San Francisco International Airport's 
(SFO) proposal to install Ground-Based Augmentation System (GBAS).  The 
Council's June 14, 2021 Agenda included items regarding an Independent 
Police Auditor contract, the Fry's site, and the preferred alternative for the 
North Ventura Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP).  The Council's June 21, 2021 
Agenda included approval of the fiscal year (FY) 2022 Budget.  Over the 
weekend, a Police Dispatcher provided cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) 
instructions over the phone to an individual who successful resuscitated a 
person suffering a cardiac event.   
Action Items 
6. 
Approval of the Tri-party Fire Agreement for Foothills Reserve Fire 
Station Staffing During Fire Season. 
Kevin McNally, Deputy Fire Chief, reported the contract term was one year 
with an option to renew it for four years.  Also, the contract called for 
staffing Station 8 with three personnel from 8:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M. 
beginning June 15, 2021 through October 2021 or as needed for fire season.  
There were not going to be any personnel costs for the City.  Palo Alto was 
going to provide personnel in June 2021, Santa Clara County Fire District in 
July 2021 with agencies alternating monthly thereafter.  Prior to 2015, 
Station 8 was staffed with three personnel working 12 hours per day from 
July 1 through October 31.  Station 8 was staffed on red flag days and high 
fire danger days, which totaled 17 days in 2020.  Full staffing during fire 
season also provided visitors and nearby residents with access to emergency 
medical services (EMS). 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Ken Dueker, Chief, Office of Emergency Services, advised that the Foothills 
Fire Management Plan detailed fuel reduction and mitigation.  The Palo Alto 
Fire Department and partners were inspecting properties in the wildland 
urban interface.  Community fire safety presentations were scheduled after 
June 15, 2021.   
Brian Glass, Acting Fire Chief, Santa Clara County Fire District, indicated this 
was an opportunity for three jurisdictions to collaborate and serve residents. 
Council Member Kou felt the partnership was logical and efficient.  She 
inquired whether Staff considered utilizing Emergency Service Volunteers 
(ESV) for safety watches in addition to the July 4 safety watch. 
Mr. Dueker explained that ESVs participated in safety watches on red flag 
days and high fire risk days.   
Vice Mayor Burt believed the contract was important in light of the ongoing 
threat of mega fires.  He was interested in learning about immediate and 
urgent actions and expressed concern that actions were not aggressive 
enough given drought conditions.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether Los Altos Hills County Fire 
District was paying for the staffing of Station 8. 
Mr. McNally related that Los Altos Hills County Fire District was going to fund 
overtime pay to staff Station 8. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated the ability to increase EMS with more 
people visiting open space. 
Council Member Stone supported the tri-party contract due to the number of 
fires in 2020 and the current favorable conditions for wildfires.  He asked 
about the potential for additional public safety partnerships.   
Mr. McNally reported agencies within Santa Clara County partnered to 
provide a fire academy for new recruits, and public safety employees of the 
County of Santa Clara (County) staffed COVID-19 vaccination clinics for 
employees of jurisdictions.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the amount of service provided by each 
agency.   
Mr. McNally indicated the three agencies discussed call volumes, but an 
estimation of calls in 2021 was not analyzed.  Historically, calls for service to 
Station 8 were relatively low, probably less than 100 over the four-month 
fire season.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Mr. Glass agreed that the anticipated call volume for Station 8 was unknown.  
Staffing Station 8 was the first step in gathering data.  The Station 8 engine 
often responded to calls near its coverage area.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding the calculation of costs and 
dividing costs among the three agencies.   
Mr. Glass advised that Palo Alto provided the station, staff, and one engine, 
and the County provided staff and one engine.  Los Altos Hills funded 
overtime costs for staffing.  Mixing personnel from Palo Alto and the County 
was not safe due to the inability to train personnel in the short timeframe. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked that splitting costs equitably was difficult 
without knowing the workload for each agency. 
Mr. McNally explained that the City had not staffed Station 8 in quite some 
time.  CalFire, County Fire, and Palo Alto Station 2 also responded to calls 
for service in the Station 8 coverage area.  It was impossible to know which 
agency was going to respond to calls.  The City did not have personnel to 
staff Station 8 at regular pay, and Los Altos Hills was going to reimburse the 
City's overtime costs to staff Station 8.  The City's costs were going to be 
fuel and maintenance of the station and engine.   
Mayor DuBois inquired whether Los Altos Hills was going to pay the full 
overtime amount or the difference between regular and overtime pay. 
Mr. Glass indicated the full amount. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
approve entering into a memorandum of understanding with the Los Altos 
Hills County Fire District and the Santa Clara County Fire Department to staff 
Palo Alto Fire Station 8 (Foothills) during wildland fire seasons. 
Council Member Cormack noted that the contract fulfilled a need. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
7. 
Discussion on the Scope of Economic Development and Resources 
Needed for Implementation; and Direction to Staff on the Desired 
Scope and Goals of Future Investment. 
Kiely Nose, Director, Administrative Services/Interim City Manager, reported 
the Council approved the Community and Economic Recovery Workplan in 
March 2021.  There was no funding allocated for economic recovery, but the 
$500,000 Council Reserve Fund, the $100,000 Council Contingency Fund, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
possibly other unallocated funds, and the Budget Stabilization Reserve Fund 
(BSR) were available. 
Leslie Parks, Good City Company, advised that there was no universally 
accepted definition of economic development.  The definition and goals of 
economic development were influenced by economic changes, an urban or 
rural community, the type of businesses or industries located in a 
community, community assets and location advantages, a pandemic, and 
community demographics.  Certain businesses had a greater multiplier effect 
on the economy compared to service businesses.  Small businesses relied on 
employees from larger companies as well as residents as customers.  Small 
businesses with less than 500 employees comprised 99 percent of U.S. 
businesses and employed 47.1 percent of the private workforce.  Firms with 
20 to 99 employees had the largest share of employment and created the 
most jobs.  Small businesses were typically locally serving and primarily 
service businesses.  Palo Alto retail businesses with one to 20 employees 
comprised 83 percent of all Palo Alto retail businesses.  It was extremely 
difficult to find new businesses that generated Sales Tax at the level of 
Costco or Walmart.  One approach to economic development depended on 
the community's goals and focused on what a city did best.  Most cities in 
the Bay Area employed an Economic Development Manager and no other 
staff, and the salary range was $125,000 to $204,000.  In the Bay Area, 
cities typically did not budget for economic development.  Palo Alto's 
economic development strengths included a high quality of life, proximity to 
Stanford University and Stanford Research Park, availability of professional 
services, walkability and bike-ability, and access to Caltrain.  Palo Alto's 
economic development weaknesses included a perceived lack of available 
parking in Downtown, quick access to major freeways, high cost of housing, 
and limited office space growth.  Options and costs for the Council to 
consider were a permanent Staff position with a salary of $145,000 to 
$150,000, part-time or full-time consultant contract position with an annual 
cost of $100,000 to $200,000, and additional funding for special studies and 
other work.   
Aaron Aknin, Good City Company, noted that economic development was 
intended to provide a high quality of life for residents.   
Tiffany Griego, Stanford Research Park Managing Director, advised that 
Stanford Research Park businesses produced approximately 15 percent of 
Palo Alto's Sales Tax revenue.  An economic development program was 
essential to keep businesses stable and operational and continuously attract 
businesses.  She encouraged the Council to hire dedicated Economic 
Development Staff.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Karen Holman noted that Palo Alto had not employed Economic 
Development Staff in many years.  Economic Development Staff were 
essential to keeping a healthy variety of businesses in Palo Alto.  Economic 
development was an investment in the economy and the future.   
Charlie Weidanz, Palo Alto Chamber of Commerce, asked the Council to 
explore an economic development plan that attracted, retained, and 
supported existing and potential businesses.  The Chamber of Commerce 
was interested in participating in the collaboration. 
Rebecca Eisenberg concurred with other public comments.  The City needed 
to tax its largest employers.   
Council took a break at 7:51 P.M. and returned at 8:00 P.M. 
Vice Mayor Burt remarked that the Council never received an analysis of 
commuters' impact on local businesses.  City revenues suffered from a 
diminishment of hotel travelers.  The hybrid model for working from home 
was likely going to benefit hotels.  Promoting Palo Alto as an attraction for 
visitors was an opportunity to help local businesses and generate City 
revenue.   
Council Member Stone noted the complexity of a commercial ecosystem and 
highlighted the need for Economic Development Staff and to pursue 
economic strategies.  He inquired about the role of previous Economic 
Development Staff.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager, related that he was not working with the City 
during that time, but he understood the role was primarily addressing issues 
for businesses interested in locating in Palo Alto and leaving the City.   
Mr. Aknin recalled Economic Development Staff working with departments to 
help resolve issues.  An economic development strategy had two 
components:  policy and outreach to businesses.   
Council Member Stone preferred to hire an experienced person to focus on 
both policy and outreach.   
Council Member Cormack noted the role of an economic development 
manager varied with each city.  Consultants had the expertise to help the 
Council determine which sectors on which to focus.  An economic 
development manager was probably the best person to conduct outreach 
with businesses and surveys.  The Staff person needed to have a connection 
with Stanford University because so much travel to Palo Alto was connected 
to Stanford University.  She requested comment regarding the Council's 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
consideration of healthcare businesses or Stanford University in making 
decisions. 
Mr. 
Aknin 
agreed 
that 
a 
Staff 
person 
needed 
to 
have 
ongoing 
communications with Stanford University, Stanford Research Park, and 
healthcare personnel to understand their role in economic development.   
Ms. Parks reported Stanford Hospital supported generation of tax revenue 
other than Sales Tax revenue in communities where facilities were located.  
An economic development manager needed to understand the various 
opportunities for generating revenue.  If the Council chose to budget for 
economic development, the budget typically paid for the manager's 
membership in organizations that provided information and expertise for 
business sectors.   
Council Member Filseth commented that the classical goal of economic 
development was to increase jobs and/or to attract revenue-generating 
businesses.  Local-serving retail was probably the top priority for Palo Alto 
rather than increasing jobs.  He questioned whether the Staff person needed 
to have bandwidth or specialized expertise and whether the City needed to 
hire someone for public safety, for example, or an economic development 
manager.   
Council Member Kou believed a Staff person was more invested in the 
community than a consultant and needed to make the Business Registry 
more robust.  She requested the rent per square foot of commercial space in 
other cities. 
Mr. Aknin advised that commercial rent was higher, if not the highest, in 
Palo Alto.   
Council Member Kou remarked that parking limited the type of business that 
wanted to locate in Palo Alto.  A Staff person needed to make existing assets 
and the City's landscape attractive to new businesses.  The City was missing 
businesses that served youth.   
Mr. Aknin related that a person with policy or strategy experience was able 
to help develop policies that attracted specific types of businesses.   
Ms. Parks added that the need for youth and family entertainment 
businesses was paramount in every community.  In another city, a 
developer was willing to accommodate a family entertainment use in a 
mixed-use development in hopes of obtaining approval of a large amount of 
office space. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Council Member Tanaka requested the commercial vacancy rate in Palo Alto. 
Kara Apple, Police Lieutenant, indicated 23 of 144 addresses along California 
Avenue and 45 of 300 addresses in Downtown were vacant.  Town & 
Country Shopping Center reported a 20 percent vacancy rate for 70 spaces; 
however, tenants for some of those vacant spaces were awaiting permits.  
Stanford Shopping Center reported 17 of 150 spaces were vacant.  The 
vacancies applied to office and retail spaces.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if Staff considered the vacancy rates normal, 
higher than normal, or lower than normal. 
Ms. Apple did not have the expertise to offer an opinion.  Anecdotally, the 
vacancy rate appeared slightly higher than normal.  Some vacant spaces 
needed a significant amount of improvement to be suitable for opening a 
business.   
Council Member Tanaka felt the vacancy rates were high.  Palo Alto was no 
longer the epicenter for start-ups.  An important goal for the City was to 
reverse the trend of businesses leaving the City, which helped achieve other 
goals.  Outsourcing an economic development function provided flexibility, 
expertise, access to other cities, and the ability to base compensation on 
performance.   
Mr. Aknin clarified that the City was going to need consultants and their 
expertise if the City hired a Staff person, but the Staff person needed to be a 
good communicator to relay information from consultants to the Council and 
community.   
Ms. Parks reported most economic development consultants provided 
independent contractors who worked on a project-by-project basis.  Only 
three consulting firms contracted their employees to cities for economic 
development.  Two firms employed one economic development person each, 
and the third firm employed only a few economic development people. 
Mayor DuBois requested the amount of business-to-business Sales Tax 
revenue.  The City wanted to adapt nimbly to a potential long-term change 
in businesses caused by the pandemic in order to continue to generate City 
revenue and to provide City services.  Cities important for comparison to 
Palo Alto were Los Gatos, Burlingame, and Walnut Creek and possibly 
Beverly Hills and Newport Beach.  If the number of commuters did not 
return to pre-pandemic levels, areas filled with restaurants that served 
commuters may need to change to a mix of restaurants and retail.  The 
community may not want big box stores.  Ordinances encouraging hotel 
development may need to be revised or eliminated.  Marketing Palo Alto as a 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
destination was appropriate.  Outsourcing the economic development role 
was acceptable if the consultant had strategy experience and knowledge of 
Palo Alto. 
Mr. Aknin noted themes in the Council's comments of an economic 
development person with knowledge of strategy, policy, outreach to 
businesses and residents, and the potential post-pandemic transition. 
Vice Mayor Burt believed the economic development person needed to 
provide the Council with strategic approaches.  In Palo Alto, property owners 
did not lower their rents to attract tenants during economic downturns.  The 
Business Registry was underutilized.  Engaging businesses and nonprofits in 
civic life strengthened the community and leveraged resources.  Initially, 
consultants were likely the best choice for economic development, but 
ultimately, economic development needed to be a role within the City.  
Economic growth needed to result in place making.   
Council Member Filseth agreed that economic development functions needed 
to be split at the current time.  Retaining community-serving retail 
businesses was difficult due to Palo Alto's high cost of living.  Obtaining 
domain expertise and strategic experience was the initial objective. 
Council Member Stone inquired regarding the frequency or annual cost of 
Staff outsourcing economic development issues to consultants. 
Ms. Nose reported no economic development issues were outsourced during 
her tenure with the City.  However, economic analysis of land use matters 
was outsourced on an ad hoc basis.   
Council Member Stone asked if utilizing a consultant for economic 
development was common. 
Mr. Aknin explained that an economic development manager or coordinator 
was typically an in-house role.  Consulting firms were utilized to prepare 
strategies. 
Ms. Parks related that she no longer prepared strategic documents for cities 
because they were not implemented.  Now, she prepared action plans for 
Staff to implement.   
Council Member Stone supported creating and recruiting for an internal 
economic development position. 
Council Member Cormack inquired regarding appropriate business sectors for 
Palo Alto based on demographics. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Ms. Parks indicated the typical approach for economic strategies involved 
analyzing the dominant industry sectors.  Communities then determined 
which sectors provided the most benefits.  In Silicon Valley, the dominant 
sectors were high tech, information technology and services, and healthcare. 
Council Member Cormack noted education was the City's major sector.   
Mr. Aknin advised that the economic development manager or the consultant 
was the appropriate party to explore a strategy for education. 
Council Member Cormack stated the Council was not ready to fill an in-house 
position because the Council had not defined the position's responsibilities.  
She preferred to engage a consultant to help the Council determine the next 
phase of business opportunities given the City's strengths and the 
community's desires.  The Council and community may want to explore 
allowing big box stores in Palo Alto. 
Mayor DuBois suggested the scope of work for a Staff member or a 
consultant include cleaning up and analyzing Business Registry data. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth to 
direct Staff to come back with a proposal for an RFP for an economic 
development strategy consultant and internal staffing plan to support a 
connection to the business community with a focus on: 
A. 
Analysis of shifts in Palo Alto business mix, including clean up and 
analysis of business registry data; 
B. 
Strategies to deal with shifts caused by the pandemic; 
C. 
Strategies to bolster Palo Alto hotels; and  
D. 
Additional opportunities to bolster revenue and service local residents. 
Mayor DuBois did not believe the Council had sufficient information to hire 
an internal Staff member.   
Council Member Filseth wanted to understand Staff's ability to take on this 
work.  Domain knowledge was needed for the strategic piece.   
Mr. Shikada felt the Motion was logical as a next step and consistent with a 
one-time allocation of funds.  Staff responded well to the crisis of business 
loss during the pandemic, and the next phase was a strategic focus on 
attracting desirable businesses.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Ms. Apple reported businesses indicated communications and relationship 
building were vital during the pandemic.  A strategy for the new normal was 
a good focus.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council 
Member Stone to: 
A. 
Hire an Economic Development Staff member to develop an internal 
staffing plan to support a connection to the business community with a 
focus on: 
i. 
Analysis of shifts in Palo Alto business mix including clean up and 
analysis of business registry data; 
ii. 
Strategies to deal with shifts caused by the pandemic; 
iii. 
Strategies to bolster Palo Alto hotels;  
iv. 
Additional opportunities to bolster revenue and service local 
residents; and 
B. 
Refer to the Finance Committee discussion of the funding source for 
this position. 
Council Member Tanaka commented that the cost of an employee was more 
than salary alone, and the total cost of an employee was probably higher 
than the cost of a consultant.  According to his research, landlords were 
more than willing to reduce rents and/or pay for tenant improvements to 
obtain tenants.  However, businesses faced challenges of a lack of customers 
and a lack of employees.  In his experience, Palo Alto families wanted big 
box stores.  A consultant was able to provide more experience and expertise 
than a Staff member.   
Mr. Aknin indicated that the Economic Development Staff member's job 
description was going to cover a variety of topics.  However, a consultant 
was going to be needed for the first year or two to provide advice for 
strategies. 
Vice Mayor Burt commented that the Council needed to weigh the cost and 
value of a full-time Staff member versus a consultant.  The value of an 
employee who provided some strategic thinking, built networks, and 
engaged businesses and the community led him to support the Substitute 
Motion. 
Council Member Cormack did not support the Substitute Motion because a 
plan developed by a consultant was going to help the Council determine the 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
level of the Economic Development Staff member.  The Finance Committee 
more than likely was not going to be able to find funding for a Staff position. 
Council Member Filseth concurred with Council Member Cormack's 
comments.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED:  3-4 Burt, Kou, Stone yes  
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Stone no 
8. 
Adoption of an Ordinance Establishing Board and Commission Term 
Limits, Consolidating Recruitment to May of Each Year, and Codifying 
the Human Relations Commission's Existing Role of Recommending 
Grant Funding. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, reported the Council began updating the Boards, 
Commissions, and Committees Program (BCC) some time ago.  The 
Ordinance contained several elements in which the Council and/or the 
Council Ad Hoc Committee were interested.  There were many policy 
questions for the Council.  The proposed Ordinance limited members of the 
Planning 
and 
Transportation 
Commission 
(PTC), 
Human 
Relations 
Commission (HRC), Parks and Recreation Commission (PARC), Public Art 
Commission (PAC), and Utilities Advisory Commission (UAC) to two terms 
and members of the Architectural Review Board (ARB) and Historic 
Resources Board (HRB) to three terms.  The second provision moved BCC 
recruitments scheduled for December to May, which affected the PTC, PARC, 
HRB, and ARB.  The third proposal was to codify the HRC's responsibility to 
make recommendations to the Council regarding nonprofit social services 
grants.  The Council needed to decide whether serving a partial term 
counted toward the term limit for a BCC member; for members who 
previously served on BCCs or were currently serving on BCCs, what counted 
toward the term limit; whether there was a time limit for current members 
to hold over until a new member was appointed; and the length of time a 
member must sit out before serving on a BCC after terming off the same 
BCC.  Policy issues regarding recruitment schedules were how and when the 
transition occurred and how to handle mid-term vacancies.   
Fred 
Balin 
supported 
the 
strong 
discouragement 
of 
ex 
parte 
communications, quality Staff Reports, adequate time for BCCs and the 
public to prepare for meetings, site visits as needed, and adequate time for 
Applicants and Appellants to describe matters before the PTC. 
Jeff Greenfield, speaking as an individual, commented that BCC recruitments 
during May were challenging for the Council due to Budget hearings.  BCC 
terms needed to end no later than March 31 so that new members 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
participated in developing work plans, which were concurrent with the fiscal 
year.  The Storm Water Management Oversight Committee (SWMOC) was 
omitted from the recommendation.  All BCC members needed to be limited 
to three terms.   
Rebecca Eisenberg believed allowing a member to serve on the same BCC 
after terming off it defeated the purpose of a term limit.  Moving all 
recruitments to the same time decreased the applicant pool by half.   
Vice Mayor Burt agreed with the recommendations for a partial term, the 
look-back period, the hold-over period, and the break after terming off a 
BCC.  He proposed limiting members to three terms.  Scheduling 
recruitments at the same time was problematic on a number of levels, and 
scheduling half of recruitments for January and the remaining half in August 
was reasonable.  The effective date needed to be the beginning of 2022.   
Council Member Cormack noted previous Council disagreement regarding 
BCC 
appointments 
during 
election 
season. 
 
She 
supported 
the 
recommendation for term limits.  She requested the rationale for counting a 
seated member's service, whether one year or 20 years, as one term. 
Ms. Stump clarified that the Council previously indicated its preference to 
provide seated members with the opportunity to serve an additional term.  
The Council was allowed to revise the recommendation.   
Council Member Cormack preferred not to allow seated members to serve 
another term if they served two or more terms prior to the transition.  She 
concurred with the recommendations for extending terms and mid-term 
vacancies.  She requested the reason for omitting SWMOC. 
Ms. Stump advised that SWMOC was created by the bond measure that 
voters approved. 
Council Member Cormack recalled the Council's intention to provide more 
residents with the opportunity to serve on BCCs by limiting terms.   
Council Member Stone concurred with Vice Mayor Burt's comments.  He 
requested the consequences of the Council not appointing a BCC member 
within the six-month hold-over period. 
Ms. Stump explained that the existing member remained in the seat for six 
months after his term expired, and after six months the seat was vacant 
until the Council appointed a member.  The Council did not have to provide a 
hold-over period. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Council Member Stone requested the reason for providing two different term 
limits based on the BCC. 
Ms. Stump advised that Staff and the City Clerk previously noted the 
difficulty of obtaining 
qualified applicants for the ARB and HRB.  
Consequently, the Council proposed a limit of three terms for members of 
the ARB and HRB.  BCC members served three-year terms, except PTC 
members served four-year terms.   
Council Member Stone requested Staff comment regarding scheduling 
recruitments for May. 
Beth Minor, City Clerk, believed it was problematic.  The Council needed to 
interview select applicants rather than all applicants. 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether recruiting in January, interviewing 
in February, and appointing in March was feasible. 
Ms. Minor suggested newly seated Council Members may not be familiar with 
BCC members in January.  In addition, the UAC usually provided input to the 
Utilities Department Budget.  Recruiting in early February and appointing in 
March with appointments beginning April 1 was probably a better schedule.   
Council Member Filseth requested the time period for applicants to submit 
applications. 
Ms. Minor reported the Municipal Code allowed 15 days, but recruitments 
were often extended to four to six weeks to obtain sufficient applications for 
vacant seats. 
Council Member Filseth asked if scheduling recruitments to end in early 
February and interviews over three or four weeks and appointing members 
in mid-March was reasonable. 
Ms. Minor replied yes. 
Council Member Filseth felt three terms were reasonable for BCC members, 
except for the PTC.  He proposed a limit of two terms for PTC members.  He 
requested the potential number of interviews if the Council moved all 
recruitments to January/February. 
Jessica Brettle, Assistant City Clerk, answered 40 to 50. 
Mayor DuBois asked if the Council needed to include SWMOC. 
Ms. Stump seemed to recall that the Council was allowed to do that. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Mayor DuBois supported the proposal for a three-term limit for three-year 
BCC members and a two-term limit for PTC members.  He preferred 
scheduling all recruitments in the spring.  He asked if there was a difference 
in setting the effective date at 2022 and making the Ordinance applicable to 
BCC members whose terms ended after January 2022.   
Ms. Stump responded that the two were essentially the same. 
Vice Mayor Burt indicated a limit of three terms was going to result in 
members with varying degrees of experience serving on BCCs.  The PTC and 
SWMOC, with four-year terms, needed a limit of two terms.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Stone to 
approve an Ordinance, with adjustments on policy issues as desired, to 
amend various sections of the Palo Alto Municipal Code in order to:  
A. 
Create term limits for board and commission members as follows: 
a. 
Three 3-year terms for the Architectural Review Board (ARB), 
Historic Resources Board (HRB), Human Relations Commission 
(HRC), Parks and Recreation Commission (PRC), Public Art 
Commission (PAC), and the Utilities Advisory Commission (UAC); 
i. 
Cannot serve more than 9 years consecutively; 
b. 
Two 
4-year 
terms 
for 
the 
Planning 
and 
Transportation 
Commission (PTC) and the Storm Water Management Oversight 
Committee (SWMOC); 
i. 
Cannot serve more than 8 years consecutively; 
B. 
Approve the suggested policy issues regarding term limits, including 
a. 
Two recruitment periods with one commencing in January for 
PTC, HRB, HRC, and ARB with terms beginning in March; and 
one commencing in August for all other BCCs with terms 
beginning October; 
C. 
Effective date of Ordinance would be January 1, 2022 
D. 
Codify existing duties of the Human Relations Commission. 
Council Member Cormack did not support the Motion because a currently 
serving member was allowed to serve two additional terms.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt clarified that the Motion prohibited a currently serving 
member from serving more than eight consecutive years on a four-year BCC 
and more than nine consecutive years on a three-year BCC. 
Council Member Cormack was not comfortable with a limit of three terms for 
members of three-year BCCs. 
Ms. Stump noted the Motion proposed to move the HRC recruitment from 
May to January, the PAC and UAC recruitments from May to August, and the 
PRC and HRB recruitments from December to August. 
Vice Mayor Burt clarified that the PTC recruitment needed to commence in 
January.   
Ms. Stump stated the Motion moved PTC, ARB, HRB, and PARC recruitments 
to January. 
AMENDMENT:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to amend the Motion Part B. i. to commence the recruitment for all 
Boards and Commissions in January with terms beginning in March. 
Mayor DuBois reiterated that the Council was not required to interview all 
applicants but was going to schedule multiple nights for interviews.  
Scheduling recruitments altogether increased efficiency. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to try holding all recruitments at one time. 
AMENDMENT PASSED:  5-2 Burt, Stone no  
Ms. Stump reported Staff was going to return with an Ordinance that 
required the Council to make BCC appointments in December 2021.  
Beginning January 2022, all BCC terms were going to expire in March such 
that terms expiring in May and December 2022 were going to extend to 
March 2023.  Staff needed to revise the proposed Ordinance and return to 
Council for a first reading.   
Council Member Kou asked if the Council was going to interview BCC 
applicants in the fall of 2021. 
Ms. Stump indicated the Motion proposed that, but it was not required.  The 
January recruitment and March appointment process was going to begin in 
2023. 
Council Member Cormack asked if it was possible to implement the new 
timeframe in September 2021. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Ms. Stump answered yes. 
Mayor DuBois did not want to change the effective date because terms 
expiring in 2021 needed to be extended.   
Vice Mayor Burt preferred delaying the effective date to the beginning of the 
year. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council 
Member Stone to approve an Ordinance, with adjustments on policy issues 
as desired, to amend various sections of the Palo Alto Municipal Code in 
order to:  
A. 
Create term limits for board and commission members as follows: 
i. 
Three 3-year terms for the Architectural Review Board (ARB), 
Historic Resources Board (HRB), Human Relations Commission 
(HRC), Parks and Recreation Commission (PRC), Public Art 
Commission (PAC), and the Utilities Advisory Commission (UAC); 
a) 
Cannot serve more than 9 years consecutively; 
ii. 
Two 
4-year 
terms 
for 
the 
Planning 
and 
Transportation 
Commission (PTC) and the Storm Water Management Oversight 
Committee (SWMOC); 
a) 
Cannot serve more than 8 years consecutively; 
B. 
Approve the suggested policy issues regarding term limits, including: 
i. 
Commence the recruitment for all Boards and Commissions in 
January, with terms beginning in March; 
C. 
Effective date of Ordinance would be January 1, 2022; and  
D. 
Codify existing duties of the Human Relations Commission. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-1 Cormack no 
Ms. Stump indicated a first reading of the revised Ordinance was going to be 
placed on a June 2021 Consent Calendar. 
9. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of a Resolution to Suspend Assessments 
for Fiscal Year 2022 for Downtown Business Improvement District 
(BID) (STAFF REQUESTS THIS ITEM BE CONTINUED TO JUNE 7, 
2021). 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2021 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Kou noted approximately 30 events were held in May 2021 
for Asian American Pacific Islander Month.  She appreciated Staff's support. 
Council Member Stone reported in-person graduation ceremonies for both 
Palo Alto High School and Gunn High School were scheduled for June 2, 
2021.   
Vice Mayor Burt advised that the San Francisquito Creek Joint Powers 
Authority (JPA) discussed a funding gap for the Pope-Chaucer Bridge 
segment and decided to delay action until the exact amount of the gap, if 
any, was known.  Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) 
employees were traumatized by the recent shooting at the VTA facility in 
San Jose.  As a crime scene, the facility remained closed, which resulted in 
an indefinite cessation of light rail service.   
Council Member Tanaka suggested the Council return to scheduling meetings 
for 6:00 P.M. in an effort to increase community participation. 
Mayor DuBois announced World Music month was scheduled for June 2021.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned in memory of the VTA shooting 
victims, their co-workers, and families at 10:40 P.M. 
 
 
 
