SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 16 
City Council 
Special Meeting 
August 23, 2021 
5:00 PM 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Participating Remotely:  Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
 
None 
SPECIAL ORDERS OF THE DAY 
1. 
Alta Housing Presentation. 
Sheryl Klein, Executive Director from Alta Housing, shared a video about Alta 
Housing, reported Palo Alto Housing changed its name to Alta Housing to 
reflect its expansion, and described assistance provided to residents during 
the pandemic.  Fair Oaks Commons in San Mateo County opened in 
November 2020.  Luna Vista in Mountain View was scheduled to open in 
October 2021.  Wilton Court in Palo Alto was under construction.  Alta 
Housing recently relocated to Sobrato Center for Nonprofits. 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
CLOSED SESSION 
2. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY-POTENTIAL LITIGATION 
Subject: Houman Boussina (Personnel Dispute) 
Authority: Potential Exposure to Litigation Under Government Code 
Section 54956.9(d)(2) One Case, as Defendant. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:16 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:31 P.M. 
Mayor DuBois announced there was no reportable action.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
STUDY SESSION 
3. 
3150 El Camino Real [21PLN-00169]: Request for Prescreening of 
Applicant's Proposal to Re-zone the Subject Properties from CS 
(Service Commercial) to Planned Home Zoning (PHZ) and to 
Redevelop the Site with an Approximately 134,515 Square Foot Mixed-
use Project. The Project Would Include 129 Residential Rental Units 
and Approximately 2,800 sort of Retail Space Which Would Replace 
Existing Restaurant and Office Space. Environmental Assessment: Not 
a Project.  
This item was removed from consideration prior to the meeting at the 
request of the applicant.  
AGENDA CHANGES, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS 
None.  
ORAL COMMUNICATIONS 
Kimberley Wong recalled racist comments made to her and others and 
inquired about Council actions that prevented racially motivated attacks.   
Nelson Ng commented that the decision not to charge an individual for 
racially harassing comments conveyed a message of no consequences to 
racist actions.  He inquired about the Council's plans to act on its Resolution 
denouncing anti-Asian hate matters.   
Mary Sylvester concurred with Ms. Wong's and Mr. Ng's comments.  The 
community needed a stronger proclamation against hate crimes, hate crime 
training for Police Officers, and a meeting between City officials and the 
District Attorney regarding criminal charges for verbal assault.   
Chris Robell referred to a recent newspaper article suggesting a Business 
Tax not apply to mom-and-pop businesses.  He supported a Business Tax on 
companies occupying at least 20,000 square feet and a revenue target of 
approximately $30 million.   
Annette Ross recounted recent racially motivated attacks and concurred with 
Ms. Sylvester's comments. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
MINUTES APPROVAL 
4. 
Approval of Action Minutes from August 9, 2021. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to 
approve the Action Minutes for the August 9, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
CONSENT CALENDAR 
5. 
Approval of a Lease Amendment Between Palo Alto Players and the 
City of Palo Alto for the Premises at the Lucie Stern Community Center 
Located at 1305 Middlefield Road for an Approximate 36-month Term, 
at a starting Base Rent of $1,410.00 per Month and Increasing 3 
Percent Annually. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to 
approve Agenda Item Number 5. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
CITY MANAGER COMMENTS 
City Manager Ed Shikada summarized the latest public health order from the 
California Department of Public Health.  The County of Santa Clara (County) 
announced a COVID-19 booster vaccination for people with compromised 
immune systems was going to be available beginning August 14, 2021.  
COVID-19 testing continued at Mitchell Park Library on Tuesdays, City Hall 
on Wednesdays, and Cubberley Pavilion on September 27, 2021.  A series of 
events, Together Again Palo Alto, was planned for September 10-18, 2021 to 
celebrate being together again.  A second community meeting regarding the 
Ground-Based Augmentation System (GBAS) at San Francisco International 
Airport (SFO) was scheduled for August 23, 2021.  The Local Agency 
Formation Commission (LAFCO) was hosting a community meeting regarding 
countywide fire services on August 25, 2021.  The City began a blog to 
inform the community about Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) 
activities.  Registration for fall art classes at the Palo Alto Art Center opened 
August 26, 2021 for residents and September 2, 2021 for everyone.  The 
Know Your Neighbor Grant Program provided funding on a first-come first-
serve basis for community events.  The Art of Disability Culture was going to 
be on display at the Palo Alto Art Center from September 11 to 
December 11, 2021.  Public Art murals were on display at the Public Safety 
Building (PSB) construction site.  Upcoming Council Agenda items included 
Foothills fire mitigation strategies, safe storage of firearms, homelessness, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
the Independent Police Auditor (IPA), economic development and street 
closures, parking management, the North Ventura Coordinated Area Plan 
(NVCAP), and grade separation for Churchill.   
ACTION ITEMS 
6. 
Detailed Review of Alternatives Being Considered for Meadow Drive 
and Charleston Road Train Crossings, and Direction to City Staff for 
Conducting Additional Studies for Consideration of Final/Preferred 
Alternative(s). 
Millette Litzinger, Consultant AECOM, reviewed the viaduct, trench, hybrid, 
and underpass alternatives under consideration for Meadow Drive and 
Charleston Road.  The viaduct was 20 feet above the roadway while the 
trench was 30 feet below the roadway.  A trench required diversion of Adobe 
and Barron Creeks.  In the hybrid option, rail tracks were raised 
approximately 15 feet above the roadway, and Meadow and Charleston were 
lowered approximately 6 feet.   
Peter DeStefano, Consultant AECOM, advised that in the underpass 
alternative, rail tracks and Alma Street remained at grade, and Meadow was 
lowered beneath rail tracks and Alma.  A couple of key intersections on 
either side of Alma accommodated turning movements.  Turning movements 
to and from eastbound and westbound Meadow to southbound Alma were 
not accommodated due to the elevated bicycle/pedestrian path on the south 
side of Meadow.  Also, a turning movement from westbound Meadow to 
southbound Park Boulevard was not accommodated.  Charleston was 
lowered beneath rail tracks and Alma from west of Park Boulevard to west of 
Wright Place.  A bicycle/pedestrian path was located on the north side of 
Charleston and passed beneath rail tracks and Alma Street.  To make some 
turning movements, vehicles needed to travel to a two-lane roundabout near 
Mumford Place.  Turning movements from westbound Charleston to Park 
Boulevard and from northbound Park to Charleston were not accommodated.  
Only right turns were allowed from Ely Place onto northbound Alma.  Some 
partial and three full property acquisitions were needed for the underpass 
alternative.   
Paul Burge, Consultant AECOM, related that train horns, train engines, 
interaction between train wheels and rails, and roadways were significant 
noise sources associated with the existing rail line.  Table 5-1 indicated that 
the viaduct and hybrid alternatives helped reduce wheel/rail and engine 
noise, and some people questioned the finding.  Both alternatives included a 
short, parapet noise barrier, which helped reduce wheel/rail and engine 
noise in most circumstances.  Electric multiple-unit (EMU) trains also helped 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
reduce noise.  It was possible to install parapet noise barriers at grade in 
other alternatives.  EMU trains without parapet barriers did not reduce 
wheel/rail noise.   
Ms. Litzinger indicated that additional study of Caltrain's long-term plans was 
needed to design alternatives that accommodated four tracks, if required.  
Because the City did not identify growth beyond 2030, extending the traffic 
study to 2040 was not going to produce significantly different results.  
Design refinements of underpass alternatives, additional study of urban 
designs, and evaluation of sustainability provided additional details but did 
not alter the basic design of alternatives or differentiate one alternative from 
another.  Geotechnical investigations were typically conducted in the next 
phase of this type of project, but conducting them now could confirm 
assumptions contained in cost estimates and the planning study.  In 
addition, information from geotechnical investigations could be used to 
explore the feasibility and merits of a box jacking system.  A shadow 
analysis was usually performed in the next phase, but it would help 
determine the extent of shadows cast by the elevated railroad structure onto 
adjacent homes.  Additional noise studies that included Caltrain's long-term 
growth forecasts may result in revision of noise recommendations.  
Additional evaluation of storm drainage infrastructure for alternatives that 
lowered rail tracks could further define impacts to creek crossings and 
drainage costs.  Additional outreach may provide additional feedback and an 
indication 
of 
a 
preferred 
alternative. 
 
Conceptual 
designs 
for 
bicycle/pedestrian undercrossings at Seale and Loma Verde were part of the 
Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation Plan (Bike Plan) Update.   
Chief Transportation Official Phillip Kamhi shared Staff's professional 
recommendations for prioritization of additional studies based on the 
likelihood of study results helping narrow the slate of alternatives.  The cost 
estimate for all of the studies ranged between $1.25 million and $1.73 
million.   
Elizabeth Alexis felt additional geotechnical, storm drain, and groundwater 
studies were necessary to determine real options and costs.  Perhaps 
Caltrain and other cities were willing to participate in the studies.  A bicycle 
consultant could make recommendations for connecting bicycle facilities at 
crossings to facilities across the City.   
Jean Bozman expressed concern regarding the total cost of $950 million, 
especially in light of the pandemic and economic constraints.  The City 
needed to think differently about its priorities and collaborate with 
neighboring cities. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
Ellen Hartog remarked that the solutions were trouble for residents in the 
area.  She questioned the need for two separations located within a block of 
each other.   
Melinda McGee suggested the City needed a transportation plan extending to 
2050. 
Michael Wessel opposed the Meadow underpass alternative including the 
roundabout because it required the acquisition of several homes and an 
apartment complex.  The roundabout was going to decrease pedestrian 
safety and increase noise and pollution.   
Robert Neff preferred the hybrid alternative and encouraged the Council to 
move toward a preferred alternative and to consider the missed 
opportunities of dedicating too much money to only one project.   
Steven Rosenblum urged the Council to consider the system rather than 
individual crossings.  The viaduct alternative provided a connection between 
east and west Palo Alto.   
Keith Reckdahl believed conducting additional studies of traffic, shadows, 
and sustainability was pointless at the current time.  The Charleston 
Meadows 
neighborhood 
almost 
unanimously 
opposed 
elevated 
rail 
alternatives because they significantly affected quality of life.  The 
shortcomings of alternatives had to be identified and fixed.  Bicycle 
connections needed to be addressed before construction commenced.   
Nadia 
Naik 
reviewed 
Expanded 
Community 
Advisory 
Panel 
(XCAP) 
recommendations that were not mentioned in the Staff Report.   
Sandeep Bahl preferred the trench alternative, which could be covered to 
increase connectivity. 
Larry Klein, speaking as an individual, recommended no additional studies 
related to four tracks and urban design.  Neighbors' main issue with noise 
was the impacts on third and fourth-row residences.   
Council Member Filseth requested reasons for the viaduct alternative costing 
more than two hybrid alternatives. 
Etty Mercurio, AECOM Consultant, explained that the cost of a structure was 
higher than an embankment due to the costs of structural steel and 
structural concrete. 
Council Member Filseth inquired regarding a route from westbound 
Charleston to southbound Alma in the Charleston underpass alternative.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
Mr. DeStefano indicated that the intersection of Charleston and Alma was 
going to be signalized and provide a turning movement from Charleston to 
Alma.   
Council Member Filseth asked about the advantages and disadvantages of 
the underpass versus the hybrid. 
Mr. DeStefano related that one advantage to the underpass alternative was 
the bicycle/pedestrian path extending beneath rail tracks and Alma.  In the 
hybrid alternative, the bicycle/pedestrian path extended beneath rail tracks 
only.  One advantage of the hybrid alternative was more direct traffic 
movements due to the signalized intersection.   
Mr. Kamhi added that additional advantages of the hybrid alternative were 
potential property impacts and cost.  Box jacking was a construction 
technique that may benefit alternatives.   
Ms. Mercurio explained that box jacking may be a way to eliminate shoefly 
tracks and provide a cost savings.   
Council Member Filseth agreed with Staff's recommendation for additional 
studies. 
Council Member Stone inquired whether Staff recommended all additional 
studies or only those with a high priority. 
Mr. Kamhi sought Council direction on which studies to pursue based on 
which were likely to help narrow the list of alternatives.  Staff prioritized 
additional studies based on information that they believed would be helpful. 
Council Member Stone asked if geotechnical studies were needed only if 
Council selected the underpass alternative. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified that Staff sought Council direction on additional studies 
rather than a narrowing of alternatives.   
Council Member Stone requested the reasons for the geotechnical study 
being more expensive than other studies. 
Ms. Litzinger advised that it provided geotechnical information, feasibility of 
the box jacking system, and updated renderings and animations.  The cost 
escalated when the box jacking system was included. 
Council Member Stone inquired regarding efforts to obtain feedback from 
Palo Alto Unified School District (PAUSD). 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
Mr. Kamhi reported the first step was working with PAUSD Staff to develop a 
process for obtaining PAUSD's feedback. 
Council Member Kou requested renderings that depicted a street view of the 
viaduct with and without a train and the length of the viaduct between North 
Loma Verde and Fern. 
Transportation Engineer Ripon Bhatia responded with a length of 6,500 to 
7,000 feet.  At the highest elevation, the tracks were 20 feet above ground.  
Electrification structures added 20 to 30 feet to the height. 
Council Member Kou noted that the bike path ran along the south side of 
Meadow in the underpass alternative and asked if vehicles were allowed to 
turn right onto Park Boulevard. 
Mr. Bhatia answered no.   
Council Member Kou asked about the ability of vehicles to turn right from 
Park onto Meadow. 
Mr. Bhatia indicated there was no turning movement from northbound Park 
to eastbound Meadow.  Vehicles were allowed to turn from southbound Park 
onto Meadow. 
Council Member Kou asked about a right turn from Meadow onto Alma. 
Mr. Bhatia indicated there was no turning movement from eastbound 
Meadow onto southbound Alma. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified that vehicles were allowed to turn from eastbound 
Meadow onto northbound Alma and make a U-turn for southbound travel. 
Council Member Kou asked if a traffic study was conducted to determine the 
impacts of these movements. 
Mr. DeStefano responded yes.  Some traffic would divert to other streets 
such as El Camino. 
Mr. Bhatia advised that the traffic study found the existing F Level of Service 
(LOS) for the intersections improved. 
Council Member Kou inquired about a right turn movement from northbound 
Alma onto eastbound Meadow. 
Mr. DeStefano indicated a U-turn at Alma Village was necessary. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
Council Member Kou inquired about a right turn movement from westbound 
Meadow onto northbound Alma. 
Mr. Bhatia related that that was allowed. 
Council Member Kou requested the turn movements not accommodated in 
the underpass alternative for Charleston. 
Mr. Bhatia replied eastbound Charleston onto northbound Alma, northbound 
Alma onto westbound Charleston, and southbound Alma onto westbound 
Charleston.  The traffic circle accommodated vehicles wishing to make these 
movements.  Turn movements accommodated eastbound Charleston onto 
southbound Park and southbound Park onto westbound Charleston. 
Council Member Cormack noted that traffic delays and safety concerns were 
the reasons for constructing grade separations.  She inquired about a 
timeframe for narrowing the alternatives to a preferred alternative. 
Mr. Kamhi remarked that ideally the Council determined a preferred 
alternative soon in order to begin the next phase of the project and leverage 
Measure B grade separation funding.  A realistic timeframe was two years to 
conclude the current phase.   
Council Member Cormack requested the anticipated amount of Measure B 
funding and the possibility of receiving federal funding. 
Mr. Kamhi advised that Measure B funding was estimated at approximately 
$350 million in 2016 dollars.  The City was not selected for federal funding.  
The City was not able to advocate for additional funding until the project was 
better defined.  The City had missed some opportunities to apply for funding 
because the project was not sufficiently developed.   
Council Member Cormack recalled the criteria a prior Council developed for 
alternatives.   
Vice Mayor Burt wished to ensure that alternatives increased connectivity 
within Palo Alto.  The latest update regarding Measure B funding indicated 
Palo Alto was likely to receive $400 million in 2020 dollars.  The City needed 
a preferred alternative to expend Measure B funding and to apply for other 
funding.  Caltrain recognized the need to close or grade separate all 
crossings and to work with cities to obtain funding for grade separations.  He 
asked about the impacts of shoefly tracks on Alma in the hybrid and 
underpass alternatives for Charleston and Meadow. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
Ms. Mercurio related that shoefly tracks in the hybrid alternative impacted 
the turn lanes on Alma. 
Vice Mayor Burt noted the likelihood of closing the Meadow and Charleston 
intersections to vehicular traffic for several years during construction and 
inquired about the number of bicyclists and pedestrians who utilized the 
intersections.  Grade separations accelerated the necessity to construct a 
dedicated South Palo Alto bicycle and pedestrian crossing in the vicinity of 
Loma Verde.   
Mr. Kamhi did not have data for students passing through the Meadow and 
Charleston intersections.  Bicycle counts were conducted at schools.   
Council Member Tanaka understood that the City was not selected for 
federal funding because the project was not ready. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified that he was not aware of the reason for the City not 
being selected for funding provided in the transportation funding 
authorization bill. 
City Manager Ed Shikada reported the transportation funding authorization 
bill was an appropriations bill passed in the past few months.  The bill 
earmarked funding for development of projects identified by members of 
Congress.  The process for the pending infrastructure bill had not been 
defined. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested the City's federal advocates review the 
infrastructure bill. 
Mr. Shikada advised that advocates were tracking the bill on behalf of the 
City. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding a table listing the alternatives 
and the number of property acquisitions required for each alternative. 
Ms. Litzinger referred Council Member Tanaka to the fact sheet and matrix. 
Mayor DuBois did not wish to expend funds without attempting to narrow the 
list of alternatives.  Based on the work of the XCAP, narrowing the list of 
alternatives was possible during the meeting.  The Council needed Caltrain 
to identify an alternative location for four tracks in light of the proximity of 
homes to the tracks.  The underpass alternative improved traffic flow and 
did not raise a structure into the sky.  Some geotechnical work could help 
the Council determine the viability of the trench alternative.  Staff needed to 
continue community outreach as the process continued.  The hybrid and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
viaduct alternatives were likely to increase noise.  He wanted to flesh out 
details and options for the underpass alternative and eliminate the viaduct 
and possibly the hybrid alternatives.   
Council Member Filseth concurred with Mayor DuBois' comments regarding 
the four-track system.  The Bike Plan needed to be updated soon but 
certainly before existing bicycle infrastructure was closed for construction of 
grade separations.  The hybrid alternative was preferable to the viaduct 
alternative.  Questions about the underpass alternative needed to be 
answered.  There were many advantages to the trench alternative, but the 
cost was prohibitive and issues had to be resolved. 
Council Member Cormack requested Staff comment regarding work on the 
four-track system or continuation of the process as outlined. 
Mr. Kamhi believed that all of the alternatives accommodated a four-track 
system, but a four-track system created additional challenges in some 
alternatives.  Staff did not know if Caltrain was going to require a four-track 
system in Palo Alto.  The question was whether the alternatives could 
accommodate four tracks and, if so, whether the cost of four tracks 
prohibited further consideration of alternatives. 
Council Member Cormack supported the suggestion for a Study Session with 
Caltrain.  The construction process was going to be extraordinarily 
disruptive.  The Bike Plan Update needed to be holistic and proceed parallel 
to grade separations.  She inquired whether the viaduct alternative retained 
trees or allowed them to be installed. 
Ms. Litzinger advised that there were no restrictions on installing trees for a 
viaduct. 
Ms. Mercurio clarified that Caltrain determined the fate of trees located in 
the right-of-way. 
Council Member Cormack concurred with Council Member Filseth's 
comments regarding the hybrid alternative.  The potential for the underpass 
alternative to confuse motorists was significant.  The trench alternative 
presented significant engineering challenges.  If the Council wished to 
narrow alternatives, it needed to discuss the matrix. 
Vice Mayor Burt concurred with comments to consider additional studies to 
the extent they provided critical information for narrowing alternatives or 
selecting a preferred alternative.  Caltrain Staff was receptive to his 
suggestion for a Local Policy Maker Group (LPMG) subcommittee to explore 
design issues common to all cities.  Caltrain Staff previously clarified that 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
they wanted to locate a four-track system at a station and where the tracks 
had the least impact on grade separations.  The City needed to demonstrate 
to Caltrain that Palo Alto was not a better location for four tracks.  The main 
reason Palo Alto was not a better location was Caltrain's narrow rights-of-
way in Palo Alto.  The hybrid alternative sounded appealing, but its height 
was far greater than its depression.  The height was achieved by 
constructing a tall earthen wall, which would be a massive division of the 
City.   
Council Member Stone requested details of fencing along walls in the trench 
alternative. 
Ms. Mercurio explained that a fence was intended to prevent access to high 
voltage wires providing power to electric trains and to prevent people from 
throwing objects onto tracks.  The fence's height would vary. 
Mr. Kamhi added that documents indicated a 10-foot height.  Concealing the 
fence with vegetation was possible, and details were part of a later phase. 
Ms. Mercurio reported the use of tie backs to support trench walls limited the 
type of vegetation that was installed above tie backs.  Vegetation that grew 
deep roots was prohibited.  Almost all alternatives required removal of 
existing vegetation and installation of new vegetation. 
Council Member Stone concurred with Mayor DuBois' comments regarding 
the viaduct alternative and Vice Mayor Burt's comments regarding the 
appearance of the hybrid alternative.  The environmental impacts and 
construction time of the trench alternative were concerning.  The underpass 
alternative was attractive.   
Mayor DuBois inquired about a shelf life for findings from a geotechnical 
study. 
Mr. Kamhi indicated the anticipated shelf life coincided with the lifespan of 
the project.  However, climate change and other changes affected the 
longevity of results.  He noted that estimates for Measure B funding was in 
2025 dollars.   
Ms. Mercurio advised that geotechnical findings did not expire, assuming the 
correct data was utilized.  Additional geotechnical studies were going to 
incorporate existing data and augment it with precise data.   
Mayor DuBois asked Ms. Naik and Mr. Klein to recommend additional 
studies. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
Ms. Naik indicated her personal recommendation was a geotechnical study, 
design refinement of the underpass alternative, and conceptual designs for 
Seale and Loma Verde.  Working through the LPMG, the City needed to seek 
support from Sunnyvale and Mountain View to conduct studies of box 
jacking, percent grade, and speed.  She did not recommend the City pay for 
anything related to designing for four tracks.   
Mr. Klein urged the Council to proceed with two tracks and leave four tracks 
to Caltrain to figure out.  Additional outreach was not a study but an ongoing 
effort.  He recommended proceeding with design refinement of the 
underpass alternative and geotechnical and noise studies.  Studies of traffic 
and box jacking could wait.   
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Tanaka to 
direct Staff to: 
A. 
Eliminate the Viaduct option; 
B. 
Eliminate the Hybrid option; 
C. 
Establish a policy to engage with Caltrain on 4-tracks by City Council, 
Staff, and LPMG representatives; 
D. 
Refine Underpass alternatives to address current shortcomings, 
including the size of the roundabout, the bike/ped connections, and 
right-of-way impacts; 
E. 
Conduct a preliminary geotechnical study; and 
F. 
Continue work on the bike plan in parallel with consideration of 
construction time and interaction with grade crossing plans. 
Mayor DuBois was amenable to retaining the hybrid alternative if Council 
Members did not support eliminating it.  The Bike Plan Update and grade 
separations needed to proceed in parallel, but the Bike Plan needed to be 
complete prior to construction of grade separations.  He inquired about the 
possibility of removing updates to renderings and cost estimates from 
refinement of underpass alternatives and adding designs that addressed 
shortcomings. 
Mr. Kamhi reported studies could be limited based on the end product that 
the Council wished to obtain. 
Mayor DuBois clarified that he wished to minimize land acquisitions and 
review the bicycle/pedestrian crossing in more detail. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
Council Member Tanaka liked the fact that the trench alternative minimized 
surface land acquisitions.  There may be ways around subsurface land 
acquisitions.  The underpass alternative was intriguing, but it required land 
acquisitions, possibly significant land acquisitions.  The City needed to 
pursue rail funding contained in the pending federal infrastructure bill.   
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka to add onto the Motion as Part G: 
G. 
Direct Staff to obtain the cost for a second cost opinion of the Trench 
option, in particular to a company with experience of trenches, 
underground or subterranean methods in parallel to the geotechnical 
studies. 
Vice Mayor Burt expressed interest in value engineering a trench alternative, 
but obtaining a second opinion may not be the best method.  He inquired 
whether Staff had any sense of the cost of a second opinion. 
Mr. Kamhi answered no.  Results of an additional geotechnical study were 
going to inform the potential cost of a trench alternative.  As more data was 
obtained, cost estimates were going to change.   
Vice Mayor Burt noted that the preliminary geotechnical study was an 
important factor in further consideration of a trench alternative.   
AMENDMENT PASSED:  6-1, Cormack no 
Mr. Kamhi advised that eliminating one lane from the roundabout caused the 
underpass alternative to fail. 
Council Member Filseth felt eliminating the hybrid option was premature, 
and there was no compelling need to eliminate it. 
AMENDMENT TWO:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council 
Member Cormack to eliminate Part B of the Motion.  
Council Member Cormack emphasized the importance of grade separation 
decisions.  The community did not expect the Council to make decisions 
during the meeting. 
Vice Mayor Burt did not believe a 16-foot-tall berm could be disguised and 
inquired regarding the possibility of constructing a viaduct-type passage in 
place of a berm. 
Ms. Mercurio reported an alternative with a mix of embankment and 
structure was feasible. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt questioned whether the Council had sufficient information to 
narrow the alternatives.   
Council Member Stone indicated that eliminating both elevated options was 
premature.   
Council Member Tanaka noted that the sense of urgency resulted from the 
need to obtain funding.   
AMENDMENT PASSED:  6-1, Tanaka no 
Council Member Cormack did not support the Motion because the possibility 
of eliminating alternatives was included in the final page of the Staff Report.  
After reviewing the matrix, she was not able to reconcile some colleagues' 
statements with information in the matrix.  She supported Parts B, D, and E. 
Council Member Filseth remarked that east-west connectivity implied 
connections through a viaduct that separated the east and west sides of the 
City.  However, Alma Street was basically an expressway that limited 
connectivity.  Absent new streets crossing Alma, significant improvements to 
east-west connectivity were unlikely.   
FINAL MOTION AS AMENDED:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by 
Council Member Tanaka to direct Staff to: 
A. 
Eliminate the Viaduct option; 
B. 
Establish a policy to engage with Caltrain on 4-tracks by City Council, 
Staff, and LPMG representatives; 
C. 
Refine Underpass alternatives to address current shortcomings, 
including the size of the roundabout, the bike/ped connections, and 
right-of-way impacts; 
D. 
Conduct a preliminary geotechnical study; 
E. 
Continue work on the bike plan in parallel with consideration of 
construction time and interaction with grade crossing plans; and 
F. 
Obtain the cost for a second cost opinion of the Trench option, in 
particular to a company with experience of trenches, underground or 
subterranean methods in parallel to the geotechnical studies. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-1, Cormack no 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 16 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/23/2021 
COUNCIL MEMBER QUESTIONS, COMMENTS AND ANNOUNCEMENTS 
Council Member Filseth found the Governor's new mandate for COVID-19 
vaccinations by September 30, 2021 interesting when 80 percent of eligible 
Canadians were vaccinated. 
Mayor DuBois announced he was scheduled to visit Heidelberg, Palo Alto's 
Sister City, to discuss sustainability initiatives and experiential learning for 
high school students.  Recent racist attacks were extremely troubling, and 
everyone needed to speak against them.   
Closed Session 
7. 
CONFERENCE 
WITH 
REAL 
PROPERTY 
NEGOTIATORS 
Authority: 
Government 
Code 
Section 
54956.8 
Property: 300 Homer Avenue, Assessor’s Parcel Number 120-17-093 
Negotiating 
Party: 
Palo 
Alto 
History 
Museum 
City Negotiators: Ed Shikada, Kiely Nose, Clare Gibson, Phil Crosby 
Subject of Negotiations: Lease Price and Terms of Payment.  
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member Kou 
to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 9:48 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 11:36 P.M. 
Mayor DuBois announced no reportable action. 
ADJOURNMENT 
The meeting was adjourned at 11:36 P.M. in honor of the birthdays of 
former Council Member Emily Renzel, former Council Member Enid Pearson, 
and Annette Hanko for their leadership in environmental preservation. 
 
