CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 27 
Special Meeting 
March 01, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:01 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH LABOR NEGOTIATORS 
City Designated Representatives: City Manager and his designees 
Pursuant to Merit System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada, Rumi 
Portillo, Molly Stump, Dean Batchelor, Geo Blackshire, Robert Jonsen, 
Nick Raisch, Kiely Nose) 
Employee Organizations: Utilities Management and Professional 
Association of Palo Alto (UMPAPA); Service Employees International 
Union, (SEIU) Local 521; Service Employees International Union, 
(SEIU) Local 521, Hourly Unit; Palo Alto Police Officers Association 
(PAPOA); Palo Alto Fire Chiefs’ Association (FCA) and Employee 
Organization: International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF), Local 
1319; Palo Alto Police Manager’s Association (PAPMA) 
Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6(a) 
 
2. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY - EXISTING LITIGATION 
Subject: Yang Shen v. City of Palo Alto, et al. 
Santa Clara County Superior Court, Case No. 20CV367865  
Authority: Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(1) 
Rebecca Eisenberg remarked that the different labor groups had different 
interests.  The litigation did not concern a bridge that negatively impacted 
one person's land but probably concerned a lack of attention to public good 
and public interest in analyzing an application.  The Council needed to view 
the litigation from the perspective of what was in Palo Alto's best interest.  
She urged the Council to settle the litigation. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Burt 
to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:06 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:46 P.M. 
Mayor DuBois announced no reportable action. 
Study Session 
3. 
3045 Park Blvd (20PLN-00215): Request by Jay Paul Company for a 
Prescreening of Their Proposal to Create a new Zoning Overlay to 
Allow Office Uses in Seven (7) Buildings Along Park Boulevard Near the 
California Avenue Caltrain Station. Environmental Assessment: Not a 
Project. Zoning District: GM. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Community Environment Director, reported the 
applicant sought informal feedback from the community and Council.  The 
owners of 3045 Park Boulevard approached Staff several months ago and 
expressed concern about the vacancy of the building, which was approved 
for Research and Development (R&D) uses.  In the conversation, Staff 
expressed concern regarding singling out one property in the block for a 
professional office use when the underlying General Manufacturing (GM) 
zoning did not allow that type of use.  Staff also shared the Council's policy 
perspective regarding office uses and restrictions on office uses.  Because 
the subject building was approved for R&D uses, a professional office use 
was not going to impact the annual office cap or change the required 
parking.  Only two small clusters of GM zoning remained in the City, and 
converting the parcel to professional office was likely to limit future uses for 
the site.  Five of the Applicant's seven properties were located within the 
boundary of the North Ventura Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP), for which 
the planning process was not complete.  When initiating the NVCAP planning 
process, the Council did not impose any moratorium or restriction on 
development activity within the boundary.   
Maia Harris, Applicant representative, advised that the building at 3045 Park 
Boulevard was completed in September 2019, but there had been no 
interest in leasing the building for R&D uses.  The building was designed to 
reinforce the bike boulevard and to be compatible with the neighborhood.  
Professional office and general business office uses were grandfathered for 
several of the subject properties, but not for 3045 Park.  The two-story 
building at 3045 Park contained about 29,000 square feet of space.  For a 
professional office use, the density was approximately one employee per 
200-250 square feet.  For an R&D use, the density was approximately one 
employee to 165 square feet.  Uses allowed under GM zoning, other than 
technology R&D, were not compatible or appropriate for the existing 
building.  A Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Plan was in place 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
for the building.  With the proximity to the California Avenue Business 
District and the Caltrain station, workers in the subject building were likely 
to patronize businesses in the California Avenue Business District.  The 
Applicant was amenable to zoning the properties at 3045 and 2747 Park 
Boulevard for general office but preferred an overlay to avoid the 
appearance of spot zoning.   
Bill Ross questioned Staff's not analyzing the proposal in light of the 
Comprehensive Plan and its designation of light industrial.  He suggested 
Staff study the area for housing 
Rebecca Eisenberg remarked that there was no rational explanation for the 
recommendation.  The applicant sought to change the zoning rather than 
lower rents.  The community favored housing over office space.   
Keith Reckdahl, NVCAP Working Group Member, clarified that Staff 
constructed the three alternatives after discussions with the NVCAP Working 
Group.  The NVCAP Working Group did not necessarily endorse all aspects of 
the alternatives.  For example, an overwhelming majority of the NVCAP 
Working Group agreed that the best long-term option for the properties 
along Park was to convert them to housing.   
Jamie Beckett noted housing was located within three blocks of the subject 
property.  She expressed concern about construction impacts if the Council 
approved new zoning because of plans to construct the Public Safety 
Building (PSB) and the teacher housing project and other construction 
underway in the area.  The Council needed to consider the area holistically 
and the quality of life for residents in the area.   
Winter Dellenbach understood the primary concern of converting the zoning 
was the office cap.  Staff developed the overlay concept.  The City was in 
dire need of housing and yet, the Council was considering office space that 
was going to increase the need for housing.   
Becky Sanders concurred with Mr. Reckdahl's and Ms. Dellenbach's 
comments.  The overlay proposal did not reflect the values espoused by the 
Council, Staff, and residents.   
James Cook concurred with Mr. Reckdahl's and Ms. Beckett's comments 
regarding more housing.  The Ventura neighborhood welcomed new 
neighbors and affordable housing.  The subject properties were good 
locations for housing.   
Council Member Filseth indicated the proposal conflicted with efforts to 
develop a holistic plan for the NVCAP area and to increase housing supply, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
especially market-rate housing.  The Applicant needed to demonstrate that 
the benefits of the proposal outweighed those two disadvantages.   
Council Member Stone requested the number of GM zones in the City. 
Mr. Lait agreed to provide the number of properties shortly. 
Council Member Stone noted the types of uses allowed in GM zones were not 
common businesses in Palo Alto.  Rezoning GM properties was going to 
make attracting those types of business more difficult.  He inquired whether 
the Applicant lowered rents in an effort to attract tenants. 
Janette D’Elia, Applicant, COO Jay Paul Company, advised that the Applicant 
began marketing the property prior to construction.  Tech users viewed the 
property but were not able to negotiate a lease.  Traditional office users 
expressed the most interest in the property.  The Applicant was willing to 
negotiate rents, but the pool of tech R&D users was small.  The subject 
property was small, and the building was new and suited for a tech user or 
an office user.   
Council Member Stone asked if marketing for the property indicated reduced 
rents.   
Ms. D’Elia replied yes.  The subject property was the only vacant property in 
the Applicant's portfolio.   
Council Member Stone expressed concern about the precedent that changing 
the zoning created.   
Mayor DuBois believed light industrial areas were important for the City.  
The Council clearly provided its policy regarding professional office space.  
General office users did not create the mass that the Council sought for this 
area.  The proposal did not align with the City's current policies.   
Vice Mayor Burt agreed that any zoning changes needed to be considered in 
the context of the NVCAP when it was complete.  He requested the source 
for the employee densities that the Applicant provided. 
Tom Gilman, Architect, reported his firm planned millions of square feet of 
R&D uses in Silicon Valley, and 165 square feet per employee was the 
traditional density for all his interior work.   
Vice Mayor Burt noted that the definition of R&D changed from hardware to 
software development, which had a higher employee density.  The City's 
definition of R&D zoning needed to provide different types of R&D.  He 
inquired about the proposal's consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Mr. Lait advised that if the Applicant submitted a formal application, Staff 
was required to conduct a robust analysis of consistency.   
Vice Mayor Burt commented that commercial rental rates in Palo Alto were 
approximately twice the rates charged elsewhere while the vacancy rates in 
Palo Alto were comparable to those elsewhere.  He requested an update 
regarding the connection to the Caltrain station. 
Mr. Lait indicated development of the property at 2747 Park Boulevard 
included an agreement to enhance a pedestrian connection.  The deadline to 
complete the connection was approximately a year away. 
Council Member Cormack was not comfortable proceeding with the proposal 
until the NVCAP was complete.  She inquired whether the funding for the 
connection was sufficient. 
Mr. Lait clarified that a design for the connection had not been developed for 
a number of reasons, including the lack of traffic data. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether something changed since the 
Applicant proposed and constructed the building such that potential tenants 
were not attracted to it. 
Ms. D’Elia felt the building's size and location were impediments.  The 
Applicant had similar difficulty leasing the building at 2747 Park Boulevard.   
Council Member Cormack felt a GM use occupying the subject property was 
unlikely given the premier location near Caltrain.  She requested comment 
regarding the types of uses that were allowed in GM zoning and the 
likelihood of their occupying the subject property. 
Mr. Lait explained that the Comprehensive Plan discussed the types of uses 
that were appropriate for GM zoning.  A developer may not consider the 
types of uses as appropriate for the area.  Many cities were trying to 
preserve industrial land when possible because there was an interest in 
having those land uses within the jurisdiction.  The buildings located in the 
subject GM zone were not likely to see any of the uses unless the City 
provided robust incentives. 
Council Member Kou asked if the buildings were subject to the Pedestrian 
and Transit-Oriented Development Combining District (PTOD). 
Mr. Lait indicated Staff would provide the information shortly. 
Council Member Kou believed business and trade schools and animal care, 
boarding, and kennels were neighborhood-serving businesses that were 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
suitable for the area.  The Council needed to plan comprehensively and 
carefully. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the current vacancy rates for office and 
tech R&D in Palo Alto. 
Mr. Lait did not have access to the relevant reports. 
Ms. D’Elia did not know. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the vacancy rate was currently high. 
Ms. D’Elia explained that it was difficult to characterize the vacancy rates 
because of the pandemic.  Some tenants were attempting to sublease 
portions of their spaces.  Vacancy rates in tech R&D spaces were beginning 
to rise as interest in California was declining.   
Council Member Tanaka requested suggestions for actions the City could 
take to improve vacancy rates. 
Ms. D’Elia suggested the City approve the requested zoning for a use that 
was compatible with the building and did not create additional impacts for 
the neighborhood.   
Council Member Tanaka requested comment regarding the impact of working 
from home on future office demand. 
Ms. D’Elia did not believe the work from home scenario was permanent.  A 
scenario of working in the office and from home on alternate days was more 
likely.  Also, she expected employee densities to increase slightly.   
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Special Orders of the Day 
4. 
Appointment of Candidates to the Historic Resources Board and the 
Planning and Transportation Commission. 
Mayor DuBois requested Council Members submit their votes via text to the 
City Clerk. 
Beth Minor, City Clerk, asked Council Members to note Board or Commission 
next to the candidates' names. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Aram James supported Ms. Eisenberg for the Planning and Transportation 
Commission (PTC).  Ms. Eisenberg was an important advocate for social 
justice causes. 
[The Council proceeded with the Agenda while the City Clerk tabulated 
votes.] 
First Round of voting for four positions on the Historic Resources Board with 
terms ending December 15, 2023.  
Voting For: 
Martin Bernstein (Incumbent)  
Burt, Cormack, Filseth, Tanaka 
Gogo Heinrich  
Burt, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone  
Michael Makinen (Incumbent)  
Cormack, 
DuBois 
Kou, 
Stone, 
Tanaka 
Curtis Smolar  
 
Caroline Willis  
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, 
Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Margaret Wimmer (Incumbent) 
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, 
 
Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Ms. Minor announced that Caroline Willis with seven votes, Margaret 
Wimmer with seven votes, Gogo Heinrich with five votes, and Michael 
Makinen with five votes were appointed to the Historic Resources Board. 
First Round of voting for two positions on the Planning and Transportation 
Commission with a partial term ending December 15, 2024.  
Voting For: 
Bobi Adle  
Doug Burns  
Rebecca Eisenberg  
Kathy Jordan  
Tanaka 
Ed Lauing (Incumbent)  
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou,  
 
Stone 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Kevin Ma  
Jessica Resmini  
Cormack, Tanaka 
Doria Summa (Incumbent)  
Burt, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone 
Ms. Minor announced that Ed Lauing with six votes and Doria Summa with 
five votes were appointed to the Planning and Transportation Commission. 
[The Council proceeded to Agenda Item Number 5.] 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None. 
Oral Communications 
James Cook opposed the Wellesley apartment complex proposal because it 
was much larger than surrounding houses and apartment buildings.  A large 
majority of College Terrace Residents Association members present at a 
recent meeting opposed the project.  He urged the Council to oppose the 
project as well.   
Jim Poppy stated the Planning Department chose to advocate for Castilleja 
School regarding the expansion project, and the Staff Report was biased.  
He expressed concerns about removing existing trees and calling the 
underground garage a basement. 
Kerry Yarkin referred to a letter from a former Planning Manager that 
indicated the City was not going to support a further enrollment increase at 
Castilleja.  The Council needed to support that statement to build trust with 
the community.   
Aram James was pleased with a Police Officer contacting him regarding his 
request for public records.  He included information regarding the incident 
with a police dog apprehending a 16-year-old male in his request.  He 
recommended the Council seek input from parties on both sides of issues 
rather than from City Staff only. 
Rebecca Eisenberg stated the Council had no authority to override a 
Supreme Court opinion regarding limitations on public debate.  She urged 
the Council to keep its promises regarding the Castilleja Conditional Use 
Permit (CUP). 
Susan Chao indicated that the Wellesley apartment complex proposal 
included a density of 72 dwelling units per acres, a roofline that was 270 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
percent taller than the nearest building, and windows facing into neighboring 
homes.  The developer needed to conduct outreach with neighbors.   
Mary Sylvester did not believe the Castilleja expansion project benefited the 
community because the project added 300 car trips per school day, removed 
existing mature trees, and included an underground garage that was not 
appropriate for the neighborhood.   
Rohini Chakravarthy proposed the Council direct Staff to prepare a COVID-
19 vaccination plan and a Citywide dashboard.   
[The Council returned to Agenda Item Number 4.] 
Minutes Approval 
5. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the January 30, 2021 City Council 
Retreat and the February 8, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
Council Member Kou suggested Council Member Tanaka seconded the 
Substitute Motion. 
Council Member Cormack concurred. 
Council Member Tanaka did not recall. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to 
approve the Action Minutes for the January 30, 2021 City Council Retreat 
and the February 8, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Stone to approve Agenda Item Numbers 6-7. 
6. 
Resolution 9945 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Designating the Amount of Project Expenditures to be Reimbursed 
by the Clean Water State Revolving Fund Proceeds for the Funding of 
the Secondary Treatment Upgrades at the Palo Alto Regional Water 
Quality Control Plant.” 
7. 
Correction: Resolution 9938 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the 
City of Palo Alto Ordering Weed Nuisance Abated.” 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Council took a break at 8:26 P.M. and returned at 8:32 P.M. 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, expected Santa Clara County to move into the 
red tier as soon as March 3, 2021.  The State's restrictions on youth sports 
were in effect.  COVID-19 vaccinations were now available to essential 
workers.  COVID-19 testing in Palo Alto was scheduled for March 2, 3, and 5, 
2021.  Applications for the Restaurant Relief Grant were due March 8, 2021.  
Restaurant Rescue encouraged community members to support Palo Alto 
and East Palo Alto restaurants.  The State of the City address was scheduled 
for March 4, 2021.  An entrance fee for Foothills Park was being collected on 
weekends, and annual passes were available for purchase.  The deadline to 
submit applications for the Housing Element Working Group was March 5, 
2021.  Upcoming Agenda Items included the Castilleja School application, 
the Community and Economic Recovery Strategy, rail grade separations, the 
Police Department year in review, unhoused services, and selection of the 
Housing Element Working Group. 
Action Items 
8. 
Review the Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 Mid-Year Budget Review and Approve 
Budget Amendments in Various Funds; Provide Direction on: a) 
Potential Rent Forgiveness Programs for City Tenants, and b) A Waiver 
of 
the 
Business 
Registry 
Certificate 
and 
Downtown 
Business 
Improvement District Fees. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported the mid-year Budget review was more 
substantial than in previous years in order to consider updated financial 
projections, the financial balancing scenario, the COVID-19 Council Reserve, 
and a rent forgiveness program. 
Christine Paras, Administrative Services Assistant Director, advised that the 
General Fund was tracking as expected.  The net impact of the Budget 
realignment totaled $4.8 million.  With proactive planning and strict financial 
management, the Budget Stabilization Reserve (BSR) and the COVID-19 
Council Reserve were not used to balance the net impact.  The BSR balance 
remained at $35.9 million, which was slightly less than the 18.5-percent 
target balance.  Year-to-date expenditures and revenues compared to the 
Adjusted Budget were tracking with the prior year; although, Adjusted 
Budget balances were significantly less.  Staff proposed use of $3.5 million 
from the $5 million Department Economically Sensitive Reserve to bridge the 
remaining mid-year impact.  Revenues for the Parking Fund were 
significantly below Budget, and an adjustment was anticipated by year end.  
Staff requested Council direction regarding elimination of positions that were 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
frozen and defunded in the Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 Adopted Budget to align 
with Scenario B assumptions.  Reduction of these positions represented an 
18-percent reduction in force.   
Kiely Nose, Administrative Service Director/Chief Financial Officer, indicated 
the Council directed Staff to present options for a rent forgiveness program 
for City tenants.  The options presented for Council consideration were 
intended to stimulate discussion and were subject to modification at the 
Council's direction.  Qualifications for the rent forgiveness program were 
similar to qualifications for other programs in the City and in other cities.  A 
decision regarding the rent forgiveness program was not required in the 
current meeting.  Staff also sought Council direction regarding the waiver of 
Business Registry Certificate (BRC) and/or Business Improvement District 
(BID) fees in FY 2022.  The BID fees typically provided approximately 
$76,000 in revenue, and the BRC fees typically provided approximately 
$113, 000 in revenue.  Next steps included continued review of the Budget 
and projections, Budget hearings before the Finance Committee, and 
adoption of the Budgets, utility rates, and municipal fees.   
Arnout Boelens urged the Council to ensure funding was available for 
completion of the Charleston/Arastradero Corridor project so that road users 
were safe. 
Wei Chen, Acme Education Group, advised that the pandemic drastically 
reduced childcare enrollment.  The qualifications for the rent forgiveness 
program were unfair, and forgiveness of six months of rent or a reduction of 
50 percent was appropriate.   
Nicole Goodwin, Reach Program, indicated the business was not able to 
provide services to stroke victims and pay rent and supported Option C in 
the rent forgiveness program. 
Penny Ellson reviewed the history of the Charleston/Arastradero Corridor 
project.  The project was a required mitigation for the traffic safety impacts 
of almost 1,000 housing units and other projects constructed in the area.  
She urged the Council not to reduce funding or further delay the project. 
Clara Chang, Palo Alto Community Child Care (PACCC), advised that PACCC 
did not qualify for the rent forgiveness program as proposed.  PACCC was 
utilizing Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans and reserve funds to 
remain in business.  Rent forgiveness would help PACCC maintain financial 
viability until enrollment returned to normal levels. 
Joseph DiNucci, Reach Program, indicated that the pandemic forced the 
closure of classes, which severely weakened finances.  He appreciated the 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
rent waiver granted in April 2020 and requested additional rent relief until 
classes resumed.   
Rebecca Eisenberg begged the Council to impose a business tax so that 
revenues returned to normal. 
Dr. Josel Cabaccan shared the benefits that the Reach Program provided his 
father, who was a stroke victim.  He asked the Council to support rent 
forgiveness for the Reach Program, which was an invaluable community 
asset.   
Dr. Jeff Englander remarked that the Reach Program provided necessary 
services to stroke victims and encouraged the Council to implement a rent 
forgiveness or relief program. 
Andrea Saliba, Dance Visions, asked the Council to support a rent relief or 
forgiveness program so that programs could continue. 
Council 
Member 
Filseth 
requested 
clarification 
of 
the 
Department 
Economically Sensitive Revenue Reserve. 
Ms. Paras explained that $5 million was set aside in anticipation of unknown 
impacts caused by the pandemic.   
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of a proactive recognition of 
vacancy savings.   
Ms. Paras explained that there were vacancies that were above frozen 
positions.  To realign the Budget, Staff decided to take those vacancy 
savings further. 
Council Member Cormack clarified that there were two types of vacancies:  
those proposed for elimination and some other vacancies. 
Ms. Paras concurred. 
Ms. Nose added that Staff consciously decided not to fill the positions and 
anticipated elimination of the positions in the FY 2022 balancing strategy. 
Council Member Cormack requested details regarding the Rinconada Park 
Improvements Project, the Charleston/Arastradero Corridor Project, and the 
Downtown Automated Parking Guidance Systems, Access Controls and 
Revenue Collection Equipment Project.  The Staff Report indicated that the 
reduction in Police Department overtime was partially attributed to 
specialized units not being in action.  She inquired whether the traffic team 
was utilizing overtime. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Ms. Nose related that Chief Jonsen had the necessary information.  That was 
a Police Department Budget reduction in FY 2021. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the Council was allowed to designate a 
rent program for nonprofits by sector. 
Mr. Shikada answered yes. 
Ms. Nose suggested defining the sectors in a way that Staff was able to 
apply them administratively was going to be a challenge. 
Council Member Cormack requested Staff verify that the positions Staff 
recommended for elimination were vacant. 
Ms. Paras advised that they were vacant. 
Mr. Shikada clarified that elimination of the positions applied to FY 2021 
only.   
Council Member Stone requested clarification of non-operational tenants. 
Ms. Nose reported the tenants were not operating their businesses because 
of COVID-19 restrictions. 
Mayor DuBois asked if the tenants were closed permanently or temporarily. 
Jeff Weaver, Senior Management Analyst, advised that Staff reviewed the 
Public Health Order to understand which tenants were operational or non-
operational.  Tenants that notified Staff that they were impacted by Stay-at-
Home and Public Health Orders were classified as non-operational. 
Council Member Stone asked if cell towers were excluded from a rent 
forgiveness program. 
Mr. Weaver replied yes, in that they were operational and neither a small 
business or a nonprofit. 
Council Member Stone requested the distinction between large and small 
businesses. 
Mr. Weaver indicated programs offered by the City of San Francisco and the 
County of Santa Clara (County) defined a small business as one having 
revenues less than $2.5 million or a specific percentage of revenue loss 
attributed to the pandemic.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Council Member Stone inquired whether Factor 5 was applicable if the 
Council selected Option A. 
Mr. Weaver clarified that Option A extended rent forgiveness to all tenants 
regardless of their revenues. 
Council Member Stone asked if Staff considered the number of tenants that 
met the five qualifications and if Staff contacted tenants about needs. 
Mr. Weaver explained that Staff did not have tenants' revenue data to 
determine which were impacted by a rent forgiveness/waiver program.  Staff 
did not contact tenants.  However, Staff noted tenants' requests for 
assistance.   
Vice Mayor Burt requested data regarding the Fire Department's response 
times since the brown-out was introduced. 
Ms. Nose related that response times were affected by Budget reductions 
and COVID-19 protocols.   
Mr. Shikada noted call volumes had decreased during the pandemic. 
Geo Blackshire, Fire Chief, stated the Fire Department's semi-annual 
performance report contained the information and was scheduled for release 
in the near future. 
Vice Mayor Burt inquired regarding the capital projects that were contained 
in the FY 2021 Capital Plan but were going to be moved into FY 2022 and 
that were essential versus nonessential.   
Ms. Nose advised that a list of projects Staff anticipated moving to FY 2022 
was part of the budget process.  The list provided to the Council contained 
projects that were going to proceed in FY 2021 and that potentially impeded 
the Council's ability to act during the budget process.   
Mr. Shikada reported Staff has not determined whether projects were 
essential or nonessential. 
Vice Mayor Burt wished to ensure that projects deemed nonessential did not 
proceed.   
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director, clarified that the list of capital 
projects provided a sense of the projects that might be presented to the 
Council prior to the budget.  Construction contracts greater than $250,000 
and consultant contracts of a lesser amount were presented to the Council 
for approval.  Capital projects not on the list and not previously approved by 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
the Council were likely to be moved to FY 2022.  Projects of smaller amounts 
were not listed and did not require Council approval. 
Council Member Tanaka requested clarification of the General Fund tracking 
as expected and the budget needing realignment. 
Ms. Nose explained that in May 2020, Staff anticipated a reduction in 
revenues in FY 2021 but did not know the amount or the revenue sources.  
Consequently, Staff set aside a reserve fund knowing that the budget could 
be realigned at mid-year.  The General Fund reflected the expected 
reduction in revenue, and the reserve fund was available to realign the 
budget.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether an alternative source for 
realignment was the BSR. 
Ms. Nose indicated a number of solutions were available to the Council, 
including additional expense reductions and other revenue sources. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the number of Palo Alto residents who 
received services from the City's tenants. 
Ms. Nose indicated that the City did not have that information.  Inquiring 
was possible, but Staff did not have the capacity to conduct a survey. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the reasons for the decrease in cable 
revenue. 
Ms. Nose related that the decrease was an ongoing trend and associated 
with the increased use of streaming services. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the rationale for donating a City vehicle.   
Ms. Nose clarified that the City was buying a vehicle with donated funds. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the rationale for purchasing interview 
software in light of layoffs and the hiring freeze. 
Rumi Portillo, Human Resources Director, reported the software allowed 
candidates to interview remotely.  It was used primarily by the Utilities 
Department.  A number of critical positions in Special Funds were vacant. 
Mr. Shikada stated the City was not laying off employees. 
Ms. Portillo noted a hiring freeze was in effect; however, there were 
exemptions for critical, safety-sensitive positions.  At any given time, 20-45 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
recruitments were open.  The software provided a cost savings in that 
interview panels convened virtually rather than in-person. 
Council Member Tanaka did not understand why Zoom was not an option. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the ambulance subscription fee.   
Ms. Nose advised that insurance did not pay the full cost.  The Finance 
Committee was scheduled to review the fee and make recommendations to 
the Council.  The proposed action pulled down the revenue estimates due to 
the delay in implementing the program.   
Mr. Blackshire clarified that the copay for ambulance usage depended on the 
insurance.  The subscription program was targeted to residents with 
commercial insurance and larger copay amounts.   
Council Member Kou inquired whether the program was mandatory and 
whether priority service was given to people with subscriptions.   
Mr. Blackshire related that the program was voluntary and affected billing 
for ambulance service only, not the actual service. 
Council Member Kou asked if reimbursement of mutual aid expenses 
included wear and tear on City equipment. 
Mr. Blackshire answered yes.  Reimbursement covered personnel salaries, 
overtime, and backfill; the use of equipment including apparatus, tools, and 
personal protective equipment; and administrative fees. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether Stanford University Medical Center 
(SUMC) Funds subsidized equipment purchases and Staff time for closing 
University Avenue and California Avenue to traffic and allowing outdooring 
dining. 
Ms. Nose indicated $500,000 of SUMC funding was intended for City facility 
needs, and $150,000 was intended for long-term aspects of street closures.  
The Council directed the action during the Community and Economic 
Recovery Strategy review in January 2021.   
Council Member Kou asked if the $150,000 was already allocated. 
Ms. Nose clarified that the proposed action allocated the funds.   
Mayor DuBois asked if Residential Preferential Parking Permits (RPP) were 
currently available for purchase. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, reported permits were available, 
but little activity was occurring.   
Mayor DuBois related rumors of companies buying large blocks of permits.   
Mr. Kamhi noted soft parking enforcement was in place prior to the most 
recent Stay-at-Home Order and was scheduled to begin again in 
coordination with commercial zones. 
Mayor DuBois asked if some street repaving could be delayed without 
affecting the Pavement Condition Index (PCI). 
Mr. Eggleston advised that funding was reduced by $1 million last year.  The 
$11.6 million shown for street maintenance covered work for slightly more 
than two years. 
Mayor DuBois inquired whether the City was eligible for Federal funding if it 
implemented a rent forgiveness program. 
Sunny Tong, Real Property Manager, was not aware of any Federal funding 
available for rent forgiveness programs.  There was talk of grant programs 
for small businesses to pay their rent. 
Mayor DuBois asked if Staff considered approaching Palo Alto Unified School 
District (PAUSD) about forgiving a portion of rents the City owed PAUSD. 
Mr. Shikada responded no. 
Mayor DuBois asked if any of the tenants had permanently shut down. 
Ms. Nose reported some of the tenants had permanently closed.  More often 
than not, the tenants that closed terminated their leases with the City and 
vacated their spaces.   
Mayor DuBois inquired about the possibility of hiring temporary workers and 
interns over the summer to fill some positions at a lower cost.  Offering 
middle school athletic programs over the summer was a way to gain some 
revenue. 
Mr. Shikada was not aware of Staff engaging PAUSD in discussions of 
athletic programs.  If the Council wished, Staff could do so. 
Council Member Kou asked if the City executed the contract with the 
Transportation Management Association (TMA). 
Ms. Nose replied yes. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Council Member Kou asked if businesses and nonprofits were required to join 
the Business Registry even though the fee was waived. 
Ms. Nose answered businesses were, but nonprofits were exempt. 
Council Member Cormack asked if artist tenants were able to utilize their 
spaces. 
Kristen O’Kane, Community Services Director, answered yes, as long as they 
worked alone. 
Council Member Cormack asked if any of the for-profit tenants received 
money from the City in the spring of 2020. 
Mr. Weaver noted one for-profit tenant did, but it was no longer a tenant. 
Council Member Cormack commended Staff for providing solid planning and 
recommendations.  The decrease in daily average room rates for hotels was 
significant.  Room rates were not likely to skyrocket to pre-pandemic levels.  
The decrease in donations from Friends groups was logical.  She supported a 
rent forgiveness program, waiving BRC fees, and eliminating frozen 
positions.  She inquired about capital projects or components of capital 
projects that could be eliminated or delayed. 
Mr. Eggleston reported Staff reviewed the Rinconada Park project and 
recently removed the restroom from the project.  The remainder of the work 
was deferred maintenance.  The condition of playground equipment and 
pathways could be considered hazardous in some areas.   
Council Member Stone requested Staff clarify the programming for special 
events, art exhibits, human services activities, and teen programs that was 
eliminated. 
Ms. O’Kane reported the Budget for special events was reduced significantly.  
Teen leadership programs were intact, but some Staff was eliminated from 
teen programs.  The Teen Center was currently closed.  Art exhibits 
continued as allowed by the Public Health Order and through the Art Center 
Foundation. 
Council Member Stone asked if a basic level of teen programs was going to 
be possible in FY 2022. 
Ms. O’Kane explained that Staff was planning summer camps based on the 
protocols required in 2020 and preparing to increase summer camps as 
allowed.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Council Member Stone agreed with the desire to delay or eliminate capital 
projects.  For him to support a capital project moving forward, Staff needed 
to show a strong nexus between the project and a necessity for the project.  
He asked what was needed to reinstate the Police Department's Traffic 
Team. 
Robert Jonsen, Police Chief, advised that two Police Officers were assigned 
to the traffic safety unit under the FY 2021 Budget.  The unit could be at risk 
in the FY 2022 Budget. 
Council Member Filseth inquired regarding the Council Contingency Fund. 
Ms. Nose clarified that it was a reserve fund and a potential source of 
funding for the rent forgiveness program. 
Council Member Filseth understood the allocation to the Council Contingency 
Fund was $744,000 per year. 
Ms. Nose indicated it was a one-time allocation. 
Council Member Filseth noted the Council had not utilized the $744,000 
allocated for FY 2021.   
Vice Mayor Burt expressed interest in a program that waived the BRC fee if 
businesses registered timely and provided requested information.  He 
wanted to eliminate or reduce capital projects before Staff presented 
contracts for approval.  The path around the Junior Museum and Zoo (JMZ) 
was the priority component of the Rinconada Park Improvements project and 
was a small portion of the project cost.  He supported proceeding with the 
path component of the project.  He inquired whether the decrease in the 
Utility Users' Tax (UUT) was a trend.   
Ms. Paras believed the decrease was driven by the telephone portion of the 
UUT. 
Vice Mayor Burt noted hotel occupancy rates were dismal, but they were 
higher than anecdotal claims.  The occupancy rate coupled with the average 
daily rate catastrophically reduced revenue from hotels.   
Council Member Tanaka believed the Council needed to determine qualifying 
criteria for tenants to participate in the rent forgiveness program.  The 
Council needed to consider a revenue limit, the number of residents served, 
and a commitment to reopen.  A referral to the Policy and Services 
Committee (P&S) to develop the details of a rent forgiveness program was 
appropriate.  He supported Staff's recommendation for the BRC and BID.  He 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
disagreed with the suggestion for Staff to approach PAUSD about reducing 
or waiving rents for the City.  The Council had to prioritize capital projects.   
Mayor DuBois remarked that the City needed to help local hotels.  Parking 
enforcement needed to resume, and plans for RPP sales were needed.  He 
proposed proceeding with critical components of capital projects and 
delaying the remaining components.  The Council needed another discussion 
of the rent forgiveness program to develop details.  He concurred with Vice 
Mayor Burt's proposal for the BRC.   
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack, to: 
A. 
Amend the Fiscal Year 2021 Budget Appropriation for various funds 
and various capital projects, as identified in Attachment A, Exhibits 1 
and 2 (requires a super majority, 2/3 approval);  
B. 
Review priorities for use of the $744,000 COVID-19 Council Reserve, 
set aside during the Fiscal Year 2021 Adopted Budget and provide 
direction on usage as appropriate;  
C. 
Review capital projects expected to begin construction by fiscal year 
end;  
D. 
Approve the creation of a rent forgiveness program to qualified City 
tenants (non-profit and/or for-profit) and authorize the City Manager 
to execute amendments to all leases in accordance with the City 
Council established program;  
E. 
Direct Staff to return with the necessary documents to waive the 
business registration fee (Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter 4.60) due 
and payable in Calendar Year 2021 and the assessments typically 
levied for the Downtown Business Improvement District (BID) for 
Fiscal Year 2021; and  
F. 
Direction to eliminate the equivalent of 83 full-time and 107 part-time 
positions (76.50 FTE and 26.18 FTE respectively) that were frozen and 
defunded as part of the FISCAL YEAR 2021 Adopted Budget in the 
upcoming Fiscal Year 2022 Budget.  
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff needed additional Council comments 
regarding Part B of the Motion.  The Council implicitly linked Part B to Part D.  
She requested Staff prepare a list of the top ten projects that were not 
moving forward. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER change Motion, Part C to read, “Direct Staff to 
return with a set of additional details of non-critical capital projects for 
Council consideration on deferrals this Fiscal Year.” 
Council Member Cormack inquired about a timeframe for Staff to return to 
Council. 
Vice Mayor Burt stated prior to contracts being presented for approval, 
perhaps a month. 
Mr. Shikada noted the FY 2022 Proposed Budget was scheduled for release 
in approximately a month.   
Mr. Eggleston indicated revising the list in a month was difficult. 
Vice Mayor Burt advised that the Council had already provided some 
direction regarding projects.  Negotiating and presenting contracts for 
approval was more work than revising the list.   
Mr. Shikada reported some of the capital projects were likely all-or-nothing 
projects.  Playground equipment at Rinconada Park was outdated and did 
not comply with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.  The 
pathway across the park was hazardous for pedestrians.   
Ms. O’Kane added that the Rinconada Park project was tied to the JMZ for 
safety and functionality.  An exhibit was going to be installed along the 
pathway.  Plans for the new playgrounds included accessibility.  There were 
safety issues in Cameron and Ramos Parks.  Delaying the projects was likely 
to result in closure of the playgrounds.   
Council Member Cormack suggested Staff expand the table of capital 
projects to highlight the importance of each project.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to Motion, Part E, “… for timely completion 
of forms due and payable … .” 
Ms. Nose reported Staff needed to explore these changes with the service 
provider and may need administrative changes to accommodate these 
changes. 
Vice Mayor Burt proposed Staff review Business Registry questions to 
highlight the questions that provided information relevant to the impacts of 
the pandemic. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change Motion, Part D to read, “Direct the 
Policy 
and 
Services 
Committee 
to 
return 
with 
a 
more 
refined 
recommendation on rent forgiveness based on Council input this evening.” 
Ms. Nose remarked that referring the item to P&S left the City's tenants with 
a continued period of uncertainty.  Staff needed to understand the options a 
majority of the Council wanted to see in the rent forgiveness program.  
Individual Council Members expressed interest in various pieces of 
information.   
Vice Mayor Burt felt P&S needed to discuss the options and make 
recommendations to the Council soon.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to combine Motion, Part B and Part D to read, 
“Direct the Policy and Services Committee to review a rent forgiveness 
program for qualified City tenants with program costs not-to-exceed the 
$744,000 COVID-19 Council reserve.” (New Part B) 
Council Member Stone understood the Council favored rent forgiveness for 
nonprofit tenants and needed additional discussion about for-profit tenants. 
Council Member Tanaka preferred to refer the issue to P&S to reduce the 
number of options.   
Council Member Kou proposed an Amendment to the Motion to direct Staff 
to proceed with a rent forgiveness program for nonprofit tenants and to refer 
consideration of a rent forgiveness program for for-profit tenants to P&S. 
Mayor DuBois asked if the proposed Amendment included forgiveness of 
three months of rents for nonprofit tenants. 
Council Member Kou replied yes. 
Council Member Cormack proposed the Motion state "direct P&S to 
implement three months of rent relief for nonprofits and look at the rest of 
the programs to determine additional details." 
Mayor DuBois preferred a more general direction to P&S.  He did not believe 
the Council was ready to approve a rent relief program for nonprofit tenants. 
Council Member Kou wanted to implement a rent relief program for nonprofit 
tenants at the current time. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Mayor DuBois clarified that Council Member Cormack's proposal referred a 
program for both nonprofit and for-profit tenants to P&S.   
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to immediately forgive 3 months of rent in accordance with Option C 
and the 8 program qualifications to be funded by the City Council COVID-19 
Contingency Fund. 
Council Member Filseth remarked that a referral to P&S was better than 
nothing, but the Amendment provided some immediate relief. 
Council Member Stone asked if nonprofit tenants needed to meet the 
qualifications in the Staff Report. 
Ms. Nose replied yes, unless the Council directed otherwise. 
Mr. Shikada understood the direction to Staff was forgiveness of three 
months of rent for all nonprofit tenants.  Anything beyond that was subject 
to discussion at P&S.   
Mayor DuBois believed the qualifications applied to the program. 
Council Member Kou concurred. 
Council Member Filseth noted the amount of rent nonprofit tenants paid in 
three months was small.  
Council Member Cormack inquired about the source of funds. 
Council Member Filseth answered the Council Contingency Fund. 
Council Member Cormack felt the source needed to be a part of the 
Amendment.  She asked if Staff had any concerns about a two-step process. 
Mr. Shikada responded no. 
Mr. Weaver believed a two-step process was not a concern. 
Mr. Shikada remarked that any tenant that felt it was treated unfairly was 
more than likely to inform the Council. 
Mayor DuBois preferred to utilize Staff's recommended qualifications.  
PACCC's revenue for 2019 exceeded the recommended limit and needed to 
be reviewed by P&S.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Mr. Shikada advised that he was not aware that the criteria for revenue was 
included in the Amendment. 
Ms. Nose asked if Council Member Kou intended to utilize Option C. 
Council Member Kou clarified her intent as Option C with Qualifications 1 
through 8.   
Mayor DuBois wanted P&S to review nonprofit tenants that did not meet the 
qualifications.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the total dollar amount for the nonprofit 
tenants that qualified. 
Council Member Cormack answered $203,000. 
AMENDMENT PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no  
Council Member Tanaka proposed elimination of the purchase of interview 
software at a cost of $40,000. 
Council Member Cormack requested reasons that Zoom was not adequate 
software for interviews. 
Ms. Portillo explained that the software allowed an interviewer to record the 
interview with a candidate, which was stored in a confidential manner, and 
the interview panel to review and rate the candidate within the software.  
She did not believe Zoom provided the appropriate level of confidentiality.   
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Tanaka moved, 
seconded by Council Member Cormack to: 
A. 
Amend the Fiscal Year 2021 Budget Appropriation for various funds 
and various capital projects, as identified in Attachment A, Exhibits 1 
and 2 (requires a super majority, 2/3 approval);  
B. 
Direct the Policy and Services Committee to review a rent forgiveness 
program for qualified City tenants with program costs not-to-exceed 
the $744,000 COVID-19 Council reserve;  
C. 
Direct Staff to return with a set of additional details of non-critical 
capital projects for Council consideration on deferrals this Fiscal Year; 
D. 
Direct Staff to return with the necessary documents to waive the 
business registration fee (Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter 4.60) for 
timely completion of forms, due and payable in Calendar Year 2021 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
and the assessments typically levied for the Downtown Business 
Improvement District (BID) for Fiscal Year 2021;  
E. 
Direction to eliminate the equivalent of 83 full-time and 107 part-time 
positions (76.50 FTE and 26.18 FTE respectively) that were frozen and 
defunded as part of the FISCAL YEAR 2021 Adopted Budget in the 
upcoming FISCAL YEAR 2022 Budget; and 
F. 
Immediately forgive 3 months of rent in accordance with Option C and 
the 8 program qualifications to be funded by the City Council COVID-
19 Contingency Fund. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0  
9. 
Policy and Services Committee Recommends the City Council Accept 
the City Auditor’s Risk Assessment Report, Annual Audit Plan, and 
Quarterly Status Report. 
Kyle O’Rourke, City Auditor, reported Tasks 1 and 2 were complete.  One 
required audit remained outstanding in Task 3.  Tasks 4 and 6 were pending.  
Under Task 5, an update of the City Auditor's procedure manual was 
ongoing, and the first quarterly report was provided to the Council.  The 
Citywide Risk Assessment included multiple risk types, and risk was scored 
based on likelihood and impact.  The risk assessment process assessed 
areas of risk.  It did not make findings or recommendations.  The Fiscal Year 
(FY) 2021-2022 Audit Plan considered the Citywide risk assessment, the 
ability to add value, Council direction, audit coverage, prior audits, internal 
initiatives, and scheduling.  Audits were scheduled for FY 2021 and 
tentatively scheduled through FY 2022.  Amending the Audit Plan for ad hoc 
requests was possible.  Phase I audit activities included construction project 
controls, Public Safety Building (PSB) construction, an asset capitalization 
audit, assessment of SAP functionality and internal controls, Information 
Technology (IT) risk management, and Power Purchase Agreements.  Phase 
II 
audit 
activities 
included 
economic 
recovery 
advisor, 
investment 
management, the building permit and inspection process, and nonprofit 
agreements risk management.  Phase III audit activities included 
assessment of SAP functionality and internal controls, application lifecycle 
management, the wastewater treatment plant agreement, and the work 
order process and accounting.   
Rebecca Eisenberg questioned the benefits of the City hiring Mr. O'Rourke 
and suggested the City return to employing a City Auditor. 
Council Member Cormack was pleased with the detail and thoroughness of 
the Audit Report and the audits scheduled for FY 2021 and 2022. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Mayor DuBois wished to ensure that the audit of nonprofit agreements did 
not increase expenses for nonprofits.   
Vice Mayor Burt felt the Audit Plan covered more area than previous plans 
and seemed to be founded on a rational and systematic approach.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt, seconded by Mayor DuBois to: 
A. 
Accept the Fiscal Year 2021 Risk Assessment Report and Recommend 
City Council Approval, as presented to the Policy and Services 
Committee meeting on February 9, 2021;  
B. 
Accept the Fiscal Year 2021 Audit Plan Report and Recommend City 
Council Approval, as presented to the Policy and Services committee 
on February 9, 2021 and modified to include the Public Safety Building 
Construction audit activity; 
C. 
Approve the following Task Orders, identified in the Audit Plan Report:  
a. 
Construction Project Controls  
b. 
Public Safety Building Construction 
c. 
Asset Capitalization o Assessment of SAP Functionality and 
Internal Controls o IT Risk Management  
d. 
Investment Management  
e. 
Power Purchase Agreements; and 
f. 
Economic Recovery Advisory; and 
D. 
Accept the City Auditor’s Office Quarterly Status Report covering 
October – December 2020, as presented to the Policy and Services 
Committee meeting on February 9, 2021. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about Mr. O'Rourke providing his 
perspective on cost reduction opportunities.   
Mr. O’Rourke agreed to provide ad hoc thoughts, if the Council wished.  
Members of the consulting team specialized in strategic sourcing and 
strategic financial planning and could provide some high-level comments.  
He suggested an audit activity on the topic if the Council wished a detailed 
discussion. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
 Summary Minutes:  03/01/2021 
Council Member Kou noted the Policy and Services Committee (P&S) 
unanimously recommended approval.   
Mr. O’Rourke advised that he intentionally requested an Action Item for the 
Audit Plan and Report so that the Council and community had an opportunity 
to discuss audit activities. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
None. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:38 P.M. 
