CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 24 
Special Meeting 
May 24, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:01 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, noted an at-places memorandum regarding Agenda 
Item Number 7 was provided.   
Oral Communications 
Becky 
Sanders 
opposed 
multi-family 
development 
in 
single-family 
neighborhoods, particularly Ventura.  Developments with a few affordable 
units were not going to achieve the City's housing goals.   
Rebecca Ward requested an Agenda Item regarding jet traffic.  The Santa 
Clara/Santa Cruz Roundtable was suspended.  The Council needed to provide 
the community with a new strategy for reducing aircraft noise.   
Winter Dellenbach advised that Council Members and stakeholders interested 
in the recent fuel spill into Matadero Creek were not notified of the meeting 
held May 21, 2021, and the update regarding the spill lacked any details.  The 
lack of transparency was disappointing.  Joan Baez, a native of Palo Alto, 
received the Kennedy Center Honor the previous day. 
Jeremy Erman expressed concern that the Proposed Budget included labor 
concessions when the labor unions had yet to agree to the concessions.  
Management and Professional Staff needed to agree to a pay reduction 
regardless of any labor concessions.  The City/School Liaison Committee 
discussed cost-sharing between the City and Palo Alto Unified School District 
(PAUSD), and PAUSD representatives advised that the Board of Education 
already adopted a budget. 
Rebecca Eisenberg felt the disconnect between the Council and the community 
was growing, and the disconnect was the Council's fault.  The Council was 
making bad choices.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
Minutes Approval 
1. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the May 10, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kou to approve the Action Minutes for the May 10, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-0 Tanaka absent 
Consent Calendar 
Rebecca Eisenberg, addressing Agenda Item Number 4, remarked that the 
contract potentially included the installation and technology that enabled the 
Police Department to encrypt its communications.  She questioned whether 
the Council read and understood the extent of the contract. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 4. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 2-6. 
2. 
Approval of a Contract With Wunderlich—Malec Engineering in the 
Amount of $186,284 to Upgrade the Software for the Supervisory 
Control and Data Acquisition System (SCADA) at the Regional Water 
Quality Control Plant.  
3. 
Approval of a Contract With Hach Company in the Amount Not-to-
Exceed $116,938 to Install and Migrate Software for a Plant Information 
Management System (PIMS) at the Regional Water Quality Control 
Plant.  
4. 
Approval of Contract Number C21180768 With Public Safety Innovation, 
Inc. in an Amount Not-to-Exceed $250,000 to Provide Specialized 
Professional Services Across a Facet of Network, Computer, Data, Radio, 
and Other Telecommunications Systems That Reside in Vehicles, 
Portable Platforms, and City Facilities, in Support of the Palo Alto Public 
Safety Team for a Term of Five-years Through April 2026.  
5. 
Adoption of an Ordinance Clarifying Emergency Building and Planning 
Permit Extensions Granted in Spring 2020 in Response to the COVID-19 
Pandemic. 
6. 
Ordinance 5522 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Amending Section 22.04.150(b) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code to 
Reinstate Preexisting Restrictions on Horses and Bicycles Using Certain 
Entrances to Foothills Nature Preserve; and Amending the Fiscal Year 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
2021 Municipal Fee Schedule to add new Vehicle Entry Fee Categories 
and Free Passes for Foothills Nature Preserve (FIRST READING: May 10, 
2021 PASSED: 7-0).” 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 2, 3, 5, 6:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 4:  6-1 Tanaka no 
Council Member Tanaka expressed concerns regarding a single bid and the 
amount of the contract. 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, clarified that Agenda Item Number 4 pertained to 
the Office of Emergency Services and was not related to radio encryption. 
Santa Clara County moved to the Yellow Tier.  The Tier system was going to 
end on June 15, 2021.  On June 1, 7, and 22, 2021, Staff planned to update 
the Council regarding public meetings and a variety of other topics, all of which 
were affected by the easing of restrictions.  Finance Committee meetings 
regarding the Budget continued on May 25, 2021.  Budget adoption was 
scheduled for June 21, 2021.  US-101 was going to be closed May 29-30, 2021 
for installation of the final segment of the Bike Bridge.  Race and equity events 
continued through June 2021.  The City was hosting the Summit on Women 
and Girls on June 12, 2021. 
Council took a break at 5:26 P.M. and returned at 5:41 P.M. 
Action Items 
7. 
Approval of Contract Number C21174926 With GreenWaste Recovery, 
Inc. for Solid Waste Processing and Disposal Services With an 8.5 Year 
Term and an Estimated Average Annual Amount of $4.82 million; 
Resolution 9961 Entitled, ”Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto adopting the Negative Declaration” for Palo Alto Solid Waste 
Processing Contract as Adequate and Complete Under the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA); and Approval of an Amendment to 
the Second Memorandum of Understanding With the Cities of Sunnyvale 
and Mountain View Regarding the Sunnyvale Materials Recovery and 
Transfer Station. 
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Department Director, noted that the at-places 
memorandum responded to concerns regarding recyclable material and 
overseas processing. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
Paula Borges Fujimoto, Solid Waste Manager, reported the Sustainability and 
Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) and Zero Waste Plan contained goals of achieving 
95 percent diversion of waste from landfills by 2030.  Senate Bill (SB) 1383 
required a reduction of organic materials sent to landfills in order to reduce 
methane emissions.  The 2017 Waste Characterization found that 67 percent 
of black cart contents were recyclable or compostable.  Staff continued to 
prioritize domestic markets for recyclable materials, when markets were 
available.  GreenWaste collected all materials and processed recyclables, 
compostables, and construction and demolition waste.  The Sunnyvale 
Materials Recovery and Transfer (SMaRT) Station processed solid waste with 
GreenWaste disposing of the residue.  Staff recommended consolidation of the 
processing and disposal of solid waste under one contract with GreenWaste.  
The SMaRT Station currently diverted 30 percent of waste from landfills and 
planned to increase the diversion rate to 45 percent.  GreenWaste's contract 
guaranteed a minimum diversion rate of 50 percent, and its historical 
diversion rate was 70 percent.  The total estimated cost of an eight-year 
contract with the SMaRT Station was $4.6 million more than an eight-year 
contract with GreenWaste.   
Bob Wenzlau related that 60 percent of recyclables was transported overseas 
without documentation of the environmental management of the material.  
The process to recycle paper created an effluent that was untreated and 
damaged the environment, and 25 percent of residual material was sent to 
landfills.  He urged the Council not to export paper recyclables unless 
environmental management of materials was consistent with U.S. standards.   
Rebecca Eisenberg concurred with Mr. Wenzlau's comments.   
Council Member Kou requested Staff review the at-places memorandum. 
Ms. Borges explained that paper material placed in the black cart was 
considered contaminated and was composted rather than recycled.  
Essentially, limited data regarding the disposal of recyclable materials 
overseas was available.  Some plastics were recycled domestically depending 
on cleanliness, amount, and availability of markets.  The memorandum listed 
recyclable materials and their disposal domestically or overseas.   
Council Member Kou requested reasons for GreenWaste not responding to the 
contract requirement for data. 
Ms. Borges advised that GreenWaste provided the primary markets but not 
the secondary markets.  In the spring of 2020, Staff planned to present an 
amendment to the GreenWaste contract but changed their plans due to the 
pandemic and budgetary concerns. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
Mr. Eggleston clarified that in the spring of 2020, a domestic processor of 
mixed paper had capacity for additional material for a short time.  GreenWaste 
was working with Staff to obtain information and maximize opportunities to 
utilize domestic markets. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, added that if the Council wished, Staff was able to 
return with an item to authorize the City Manager to utilize a domestic market.   
Council Member Kou felt community engagement regarding changes to the 
GreenWaste contract was important.   
Mr. Eggleston noted that the SMaRT Station sent more materials overseas 
than GreenWaste.  Community engagement occurred during the presentation 
of the Zero Waste Plan, which included the decision process regarding the 
SMaRT Station. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding GreenWaste's annual reporting. 
Ms. Borges indicated that GreenWaste provided reports to Staff.  The contract 
contained a penalty for late reporting. 
Council Member Filseth requested the outcome for materials that the SMaRT 
Station diverted from the landfill. 
Ms. Borges reported the material was sent overseas or composted. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the SMaRT Station and GreenWaste sent 
overseas the same types of material. 
Ms. Borges replied yes, except GreenWaste utilized domestic markets for 
certain plastics. 
Council Member Filseth remarked that the change to the GreenWaste contract 
resulted in a higher diversion rate and slightly lower cost.  He inquired whether 
most material sent overseas was not recycled. 
Ms. Borges advised that the outcomes for mixed-paper material sent overseas 
was not fully known.   
Council Member Filseth inquired whether sending material overseas was better 
than sending it to the landfill. 
Ms. Borges explained that China restricted receipt of materials because the 
material was dirty and was not able to be processed.  GreenWaste was utilizing 
technology to provide cleaner materials for processing overseas. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
Council Member Filseth asked if verification of materials being recycled 
overseas was possible. 
Ms. Borges responded yes, because there was a market for recycled paper. 
Council Member Filseth requested a best guess of the percentage of material 
recycled overseas. 
Ms. Borges did not have a guess because of the lack of information. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the lack of information from overseas 
warranted landfilling material rather than attempting to recycle it. 
Ms. Borges did not have sufficient information to make such a decision. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if past Council direction included providing recycling 
reports to the Council and public. 
Mr. Eggleston answered no. 
Vice Mayor Burt requested the percentage of material being sent overseas. 
Ms. Borges reported GreenWaste sent 40 percent of materials to domestic 
markets and 60 percent to overseas markets. 
Vice Mayor Burt noted that the concerns about recycling materials overseas 
was the amount of material actually recycled and environmental damage 
caused by recycling processes.  He inquired about a potential process to 
determine the amount of materials recycled and compliance with 
environmental regulations. 
Mr. Eggleston stated Staff discussed next steps such as using GPS trackers, 
hiring agents, and traveling to determine the final destination of materials. 
Vice Mayor Burt suggested Staff work with other GreenWaste cities to require 
GreenWaste to provide verification. 
Council Member Stone inquired whether modification of the GreenWaste 
contract was possible if the Council later did not receive requested information 
or whether delaying the contract was possible.   
Ms. Borges explained that the collection contract contained provisions that 
allowed the City to modify the contract if the City found other resources for 
recyclable materials or found that environmental impacts were too great.  She 
needed to review the solid waste contract, which was before the Council, to 
determine whether it also contained provisions for modification. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
Council Member Stone wanted the solid waste contract to contain provisions 
for modification because of concerns about environmental impacts.  He asked 
if the compost giveaway at Eleanor Pardee Community Gardens was at risk of 
elimination due to Budget cuts. 
Ms. Borges answered no, because the service was funded through the Refuse 
Fund. 
Council Member Stone inquired whether Staff anticipated an increase in the 
annual amount of waste collected in Palo Alto. 
Ms. Borges explained that a constant amount of solid waste was used to 
provide a realistic comparison of facilities.  The actual cost of the contract was 
going to vary based on actual amounts collected, but hopefully the amounts 
were going to decrease over time. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether Staff compared Palo Alto's costs and 
rates with those charged in nearby cities.  He noted Palo Alto's residential 
monthly trash rates were higher than those charged in Mountain View and 
Menlo Park, and Palo Alto's expenses were greater than revenues.  He 
requested the number of bids Staff received. 
Mr. Eggleston answered one bid. 
Council Member Tanaka felt it was important to obtain more than one bid due 
to the contract amount and refuse rates.  He inquired whether the City 
purchased trucks for GreenWaste. 
Mr. Eggleston replied yes. 
Mr. Shikada noted Staff did not provide the rate information for Council 
Member Tanaka's comparison.   
Mr. Eggleston reported a direct comparison of refuse rates was not possible 
due to differences in the quality and level of services provided, such as Palo 
Alto's refuse rates funded street sweeping services and the annual clean-up 
day. 
Council Member Cormack concurred with the Vice Mayor Burt's comments 
regarding working with other jurisdictions.  Staff made a comprehensive effort 
to notify potential vendors of the bid.  Garbage trucks were going to travel 
further to the landfill, but calculations determined that the environmental 
impact was less than significant.   
Mayor DuBois inquired regarding the quality of Staff's relationship with 
GreenWaste. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
Ms. Borges indicated the relationship was good.  GreenWaste developed its 
own environmental goals for sustainability and was prioritizing domestic 
markets.   
Mayor DuBois inquired regarding the need for an amendment to utilize a 
domestic processor. 
Mr. Eggleston advised that using a domestic processor increased the cost. 
Mayor DuBois asked if GreenWaste planned to continue utilizing the Los Altos 
Treatment Plant site. 
Ms. Borges indicated that was not part of the contract before the Council. 
Mayor DuBois asked if GreenWaste was considering electric or cleaner trucks. 
Ms. Borges related that GreenWaste was exploring an electric vehicle for a 
long-haul truck.   
Mayor DuBois suggested the community review his letter and the Sierra Club's 
apology letter regarding the City being green.  The proposed contract provided 
a better alternative for recyclable materials, reduced the City's cost, and 
recycled more material.  He encouraged Staff to continue educating the public.  
GreenWaste's reports needed to be provided to the Council.  He inquired 
whether it was possible to include goals for tracing recyclable materials in the 
contract.   
Vice Mayor Burt inquired about a comparison of Palo Alto's diversion rate with 
other cities' diversion rates. 
Ms. Borges reported 82 percent of Palo Alto's waste was diverted, but she did 
not have the information for other cities. 
Vice Mayor Burt remarked that residents were charged for collection of the 
black cart only.  Council Member Tanaka's rate comparison was misleading.  
Senator Becker was considering legislation that benefited California's recycling 
industry.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to: 
A. 
Approve and authorize the City Manager or their designee to execute an 
agreement with GreenWaste Recovery, Inc. for solid waste processing 
and disposal services to begin January 1, 2022 with an 8.5-year Term 
and estimated average annual amount of $4.82 million over the contract 
term;  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
B. 
Adopt the Negative Declaration for Palo Alto Solid Waste Processing 
Contract as Adequate and Complete Under the California Environmental 
Quality Act”; 
C. 
Approve an Amendment to the Second Memorandum of Understanding 
(MOU) between the cities of Palo Alto, Mountain View, and Sunnyvale 
for processing solid waste at the Sunnyvale Materials Recovery and 
Transfer Station, to extend the end of the term of the MOU from October 
15, 2021 to December 31, 2021;  
D. 
Pursue, with other cities, to have GreenWaste provide greater 
accounting of secondary markets that they utilize; 
E. 
Direct the City Manager to return with an amendment to authorize a 
quick response to opportunities to utilize domestic mixed-use paper 
recycling; 
F. 
Provide GreenWaste reports to the public and City Council on a regular 
basis; and 
G. 
Work with other cities on legislation to spur domestic or in-state 
recycling. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to Motion, Part E, “... the appropriate 
contract to authorize a quick response.” 
Council Member Filseth related that Staff made a compelling case for the 
partnership with GreenWaste.  The City needed to work with GreenWaste to 
learn about the end result of recyclable materials.   
Council Member Kou suggested the Council consider landfilling recyclables if 
information was not forthcoming.   
Vice Mayor Burt requested Staff provide a timeframe for GreenWaste to 
provide information before the matter returned to the Council.   
Mr. Eggleston advised that, when the Council received GreenWaste's reports, 
it was able to discuss progress or lack of progress toward obtaining 
information. 
Vice Mayor Burt believed that landfilling recyclables may not be the correct 
environmental decision, but it was a possibility.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to include, “If GreenWaste is unable to provide 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
additional secondary market accounting, direct Staff to return to Council for 
consideration of further actions.” (New Part H). 
Council Member Cormack indicated the Motion moved the City in the right 
direction at the right pace.  Residents needed to batch deliveries to reduce the 
amount of mixed-paper placed in the recyclable cart. 
Council Member Tanaka did not support the Motion on environmental grounds.  
Refuse rates in other cities also funded additional services.  Palo Alto's refuse 
rates were high for lower-income residents.  Staff needed to advertise bids 
more in order to increase the number of responses. 
Council Member Stone concurred with Council Member Cormack's comments. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois 
to: 
A. 
Approve and authorize the City Manager or their designee to execute an 
agreement with GreenWaste Recovery, Inc. for solid waste processing 
and disposal services to begin January 1, 2022 with an 8.5-year Term 
and estimated average annual amount of $4.82 million over the contract 
term;  
B. 
Adopt the Negative Declaration for Palo Alto Solid Waste Processing 
Contract as Adequate and Complete Under the California Environmental 
Quality Act;   
C. 
Approve an Amendment to the Second Memorandum of Understanding 
(MOU) between the cities of Palo Alto, Mountain View, and Sunnyvale 
for processing solid waste at the Sunnyvale Materials Recovery and 
Transfer Station, to extend the end of the term of the MOU from October 
15, 2021 to December 31, 2021;  
D. 
Pursue, with other cities, to have GreenWaste provide greater 
accounting of secondary markets that they utilize; 
E. 
Direct the City Manager to return with an amendment to the appropriate 
contract to authorize a quick response to opportunities to utilize 
domestic mixed-use paper recycling; 
F. 
Provide GreenWaste reports to the public and City Council on a regular 
basis;  
G. 
Work with other cities on legislation to spur domestic or in-state 
recycling; and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
H. 
If GreenWaste is unable to provide additional secondary market 
accounting, direct Staff to return to Council for consideration of further 
actions.  
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
8. 
Review of the Fiber Network Expansion Plan and Fiber-to-the-Home 
(FTTH) Business Case, Provide Feedback on the FTTH Business Model, 
and 
Direction 
That 
Includes 
Building 
Community 
Awareness, 
Engagement and Survey, and Funding Options. 
Dean Batchelor, Utilities Department Director, reported the Council previously 
approved Phases I and III of Fiber to the Home (FTTH).   
John Honker, Magellan Advisors, advised that the fiber backbone was the core 
infrastructure that the City owned and operated.  The backbone benefited the 
City, and expansion was the basis for utility modernization, Smart City 
infrastructure, commercial fiber leasing, and broadband FTTH.  An expanded 
backbone provided the foundation for FTTH and provided flexibility to deploy 
fiber incrementally.  New infrastructure was designed to cover the major 
corridors and increase the capacity of City of Palo Alto Utilities (CPAU).  The 
total cost of expansion, including a 20-percent contingency, was $22 million.   
Mayor DuBois requested the state of the existing backbone. 
Mr. Honker indicated it was running low on capacity, which prevented the 
addition of connections and created a risk for existing services.   
Vice Mayor Burt inquired whether the expansion was likely to generate 
revenue from commercial customers before fiber reached residences.   
Mr. Honker answered yes.  Conservative projections were a 2 percent annual 
increase in revenue for the City.   
Vice Mayor Burt asked if the expansion was going to increase the Electric 
Utility's reliability.   
Mr. Honker indicated that the expansion was designed to fortify substation 
connectivity and increase redundancy.   
Mr. Batchelor added that FTTH provided opportunities for new technologies 
and responding to outages more quickly.  If the Council chose not to rebuild 
the existing backbone, cellular backhauling was going to be needed and was 
going to increase costs. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
Mr. Honker related that, for the purposes of the presentation, FTTH was 
synonymous with broadband and high-speed internet.  Currently, 63 cities 
across the United States owned fiber infrastructure and provided internet 
services directly; 286 cities provided dark fiber only; and 71 cities owned fiber 
infrastructure and provided internet services with a partner.  Two business 
model options for FTTH were available for the City:  the City owned and 
operated the network or leased the network to a partner.  The partner model 
was relatively new, but a few cities with populations of less than 20,000 
utilized it.  A market analysis found that the City's rates were able to compete 
with existing providers' rates and generally 5 to 10 percent less competitors' 
rates.  The City was able to create a sustainable business if 32 percent of 
residents subscribed to fiber services.  Capital costs totaled approximately $86 
million in the City model with a 32 percent take rate and $80.5 million in the 
partner model with a 43 percent take rate.  With a working capital set-aside, 
required funding totaled approximately $98.5 million in the City model and 
$86.5 million in the partner model.  Utilizing $17.5 million from the Fiber Fund 
and a $15 million loan from the Electric Special Projects Reserve Fund, the 
City needed to finance $66 million in the City model and $54 million in the 
partner model.  Projections for the City model indicated total revenues grew 
to $11 million in Year 5 and $14 million in Year 20.  With debt service of $3.4 
million per year and repayment of the Electric Special Projects Reserve Fund 
of $1.7 million in Years 3 through 10, the cumulative fund balance grew from 
$10 million in Year 1 to $70.6 million in Year 20.  In the partner model, the 
cumulative fund balance grew from $7 million in Year 1 to $47 million in Year 
20.  Key risks for the City model were retail prices, take rates, operating costs, 
and construction costs.  A take rate of 24 percent in the City model allowed 
the City to break even.  Deploying FTTH without the City taking on new debt 
required the City to build out the network over a longer period, reinvest excess 
revenues into expansion, and utilize companion projects wherever possible to 
reduce costs.  With new debt, FTTH was available to 100 percent of homes 
and businesses in five years.  Without new debt, FTTH was available to 13,000 
homes and business in three years and another 7,500 homes and businesses 
in ten years with alternative funding strategies needed for FTTH to reach the 
remaining 7,500 homes and businesses.  Next steps included community 
engagement and education.  The Utilities Advisory Commission (UAC) 
recommended build out of the fiber backbone utilizing the City model and 
acceleration and completion of community education and engagement.   
Don Jackson, speaking as an individual, did not recommend the network 
provide telephone or television service and questioned holding the upfront 
costs to a standard of profitability.  Costs were reasonable and manageable.   
Andy Poggio suggested the City assess public interest in FTTH after completion 
of a community awareness and marketing campaign.  Palo Alto Online's article 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
regarding FTTH was inaccurate.  He supported building out the fiber network 
now.   
Loren Smith supported Citywide implementation of an augmented and robust 
fiber backbone and a City-owned network that delivered FTTH service.  The 
pandemic demonstrated the need for a more reliable and resilient broadband 
service.   
Subodh Lyengar supported FTTH expansion and the City model.  Simple and 
inexpensive service plans were key to the take rate.   
Rohit Mediratta supported the FTTH project.  The presentation did not indicate 
uplink speeds and whether the bandwidth coming into the City needed to be 
expanded when FTTH was complete. 
Rebecca Eisenberg urged the City to invest in a municipal internet service 
provider (ISP) and to provide services to everyone. 
David Terrell supported FTTH as a public ISP.  CPAU's customer service and 
availability of services were vastly superior to other utility providers. 
Daniel Dulitz supported FTTH with the City model.  Currently, broadband 
service was not available to homes in the Foothills area, and satellite service 
did not accommodate video conferences or real-time work.   
Council took a break at 8:25 P.M. and returned at 8:36 P.M. 
Council Member Cormack believed holding a Study Session prior to an Action 
Item was likely to have benefited the Council.  The Citizens Survey reflected 
the community's desire for good internet service.  At this point, everyone 
needed internet service.  The information about construction was interesting, 
and the Council needed to understand the costs of construction.  She inquired 
about the reasons for aerial construction versus underground construction. 
Mr. Batchelor explained that in areas where utilities were undergrounded, 
there were no poles, and fiber was going to be undergrounded as well.  In the 
remaining areas of the City, fiber was going to utilize the existing poles.   
Council Member Cormack inquired regarding the utilities currently utilizing 
poles. 
Mr. Batchelor responded the Electric Utility, AT&T, Comcast, and in some areas 
dark fiber.   
Mayor DuBois asked if CPAU was going to utilize fiber to connect to utilities at 
homes. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
Mr. Batchelor answered yes.   
Mayor DuBois inquired whether the consultants considered a model that 
omitted connections for homes that did not commit to fiber service. 
Mr. Honker advised that construction of a fiber drop occurred when a residence 
subscribed to service. 
Mayor DuBois expressed concern that rebuilding the existing backbone was 
going to exhaust the Fiber Fund.  He asked if it was possible to underground 
fiber using a single 2-inch duct. 
Mr. Honker answered yes.  The design included two or three 2-inch ducts to 
accommodate future needs without having to dig a second time.   
Mayor DuBois inquired whether the no new debt model considered charging a 
higher rate for homes located in hard to reach areas. 
Mr. Honker replied no, but it was a possibility.  Charging a premium or a 
connection fee were options to charging a higher rate. 
Mayor DuBois noted that the $2 million for the next phase was funded with 
$0.5 million from the Electric Fund and $1.5 million from the Fiber Fund and 
inquired regarding the split between multiple uses and potential benefits. 
Mr. Honker explained that the split was based on the amount of infrastructure 
each department utilized.  Fiber provided the Electric Utility with reliability and 
resiliency, and 25 to 33 percent of costs was attributed to the Electric Utility 
based on total fibers utilized in the system and utilized by electric-only 
infrastructure. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if the full roll-out served homes and small businesses. 
Mr. Honker responded yes.   
Vice Mayor Burt suggested reverting to the name Fiber to the Premise (FTTP) 
so that the public understood that small businesses were going to be served 
as well as homes.  He inquired whether $30 million or $34 million was the 
correct balance of the Fiber Fund. 
David Yuan, Utilities Strategic Business Analyst, replied $35 million, but $2 
million was set aside for the next phase.  The models utilized a fund balance 
of $30 million. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt understood that the Fiber Fund was an Enterprise Fund, and 
the use of Enterprise Funds was restricted.  He inquired whether that was 
correct. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that legally the rate charged for fiber 
services was allowed to exceed the cost of providing fiber services, and the 
Council had discretion to utilize the funds for a variety of purposes.  
Propositions 218 and 26 did not limit the use of funds generated by fiber to 
the fiber utility only. 
Vice Mayor Burt remarked that the Council missed an opportunity to utilize 
the Fiber Fund to offset Budget cuts.  He expressed interest in a discussion of 
utilizing a portion of the Fiber Fund to fill the Budget gap, particularly as the 
Fiber Fund contained $5 million more than modeling assumed.   
Council Member Stone requested explanations of a "dig once" policy and micro 
trenching. 
Mr. Honker explained that the City's Dig Once Ordinance required other 
utilities to be notified of projects involving trenches in the right-of-way so that 
utilities installed infrastructure in the same trench.  The Dig Once Ordinance 
was not applicable to directional drilling to place conduit because it did not 
involve trenches.  Micro trenching typically involved a 12-inch cut in sidewalk 
pavement to install conduit.  The success of micro trenching depended upon 
the depth of the cut and the quality of pavement restoration. 
Council Member Stone asked if it was possible to determine the success of 
micro trenching prior to performing the work. 
Mr. Honker related that the engineering phase was going to note opportunities 
for micro trenching and determine if the cost/benefit was sufficient to utilize 
micro trenching. 
Mr. Batchelor added that micro trenching was better utilized in rural areas.  In 
Palo Alto, micro trenching occurred against the curb and just above 
underground utility services.  In repairing underground utility services, the 
chance of damaging fiber conduits was high.   
Council Member Stone inquired whether the range for construction costs was 
based on these types of construction methods. 
Mr. Honker reported the $22 to $28 million range was an interim analysis that 
considered 2-inch and 4-inch conduit.  The analysis found that 2-inch conduit 
was cost-effective for the City.  The $22 million construction cost included 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
multiple installations of 2-inch conduit and directional boring for the majority 
of the work.   
Council Member Filseth asked if AT&T and Comcast were active in cities that 
provided fiber. 
Mr. Honker replied yes.   
Council Member Filseth requested the response of telecommunication and 
cable companies when cities began providing broadband service.   
Mr. Honker indicated that the companies released negative campaigns, 
increased marketing funds, and lobbied city officials until projects were 
approved, at which time they began competing for accounts.  The biggest 
challenge for cable and telecommunication companies was their own negative 
reputations. 
Council Member Filseth asked if fiber cities met their take rate goals despite 
the competition. 
Mr. Honker responded yes.   
Council Member Filseth asked if residents switched to fiber because of price 
and brand image. 
Mr. Honker answered yes.  Speed, price, and brand were the three 
determining factors.   
Council Member Filseth inquired whether telecommunication and cable 
companies offered gigabit services. 
Mr. Honker replied yes.  In most cases, the companies offered gigabit services 
after cities began providing it.   
Council Member Filseth inquired regarding the degree that live television 
service was an issue. 
Mr. Honker reported live television was less of an issue now than two years 
ago.  Older residents were more likely to want television service.  There were 
ways to offer television service at low cost and low overhead.   
Council Member Tanaka asked Mr. Honker to comment regarding open access. 
Mr. Honker explained that open access allowed multiple ISPs to operate on a 
network at the same time.  Open access worked well in Europe because it was 
an established model.  In the United States, ISPs were less interested in open 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
access because each ISP received a small share of the market.  A small 
number of ISPs operated on open access networks.  The technology for open 
access was not 100 percent mature.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about a model in which the City offered ISPs 
a discounted rate in exchange for providing the last mile of infrastructure and 
open access. 
Mr. Honker related that the model was used, but construction costs and the 
return on investment for ISPs were challenging.  If the City helped fund 
construction costs, the return on investment was still a challenge. 
Council Member Tanaka clarified his question, indicating the City funded a 
portion of construction costs in exchange for ISPs providing open access for 
other ISPs so that consumers had a choice of providers. 
Mr. Honker indicated the return on investment remained a factor in 
profitability for ISPs.  The question was whether the City was able to fund a 
large enough portion of construction costs.  As to open access, the ISP 
provided capital funding and competed with other ISPs that contributed no 
capital funding. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked that the ISP charged the other ISPs for 
access. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether open access was similar to the City 
having multiple ISP partners. 
Mr. Honker replied no.  The City owned and operated the network, and the 
ISPs offered network services to customers.   
Council Member Kou asked if the disadvantages of open access were similar 
to those for the partner model. 
Mr. Honker indicated the disadvantages of open access were greater than the 
disadvantages of the City and partner models. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether pole replacement was included in the 
construction cost. 
Mr. Honker advised that it was included in the $3.5 million contingency. 
Council Member Kou asked if the Fiber Fund was going to fund the backbone. 
Mr. Honker clarified that a portion of the Fiber Fund was going to be used to 
finance the backbone. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
Council Member Kou asked if Magellan Advisers planned to help with pricing 
and branding.   
Mr. Honker reported that was a possibility if the Council wished. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding community outreach. 
Mr. Honker explained that he planned to work with the Communications 
Officer to utilize existing campaigns and platforms to make the community 
aware of fiber and to engage the community in the survey process.  
Council Member Kou requested the timeframe for community engagement. 
Mr. Honker indicated the end of June to December 2021.   
Mr. Batchelor advised that Staff was considering neighborhood ambassadors, 
new tools to launch two-way communications, and focus groups and 
interviews within neighborhoods.   
Mayor Dubois believed FTTH was going to generate revenue, save residents 
money, and enable businesses.  The City's Fiber Fund was a unique 
advantage.  Construction costs had to be identified and reduced as much as 
possible.  He was interested in obtaining commitments rather than survey 
responses from residents.  Cities in the region were building community-based 
networks.  The business case for the City model was strong.   
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to approve 
and direct Staff to pursue build out of the City fiber backbone in a manner 
designed to support citywide Fiber-to-the-Home (FTTH), including approve the 
near-term 12-month workplan outlined in the report and establish a City-
operated Internet Service Provider (ISP) model to offer FTTH service within 
five years. 
A. 
Perform the following tasks by March 31, 2022:  
i. 
Combine Phases 2 and 4 of the Magellan contract (C20176363) to 
provide detailed engineering design of the City’s fiber backbone 
and FTTH distribution network;  
ii. 
Complete a detailed City-operated ISP model, to include a 
combination of insource and outsource functions;  
iii. 
Complete a residential and commercial broadband survey;  
iv. 
Complete a risk and mitigation analysis of City-operated ISP 
model;  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
v. 
Determine the best financing model, including availability of 
federal and state funding options;  
B. 
Establish a City-operated Internet Service Provider (ISP) model to offer 
FTTH service within five years; and  
C. 
Per Council prior direction as part of the Community and Economic 
Recovery work plan, Staff will prioritize and accelerate community 
education and engagement regarding FTTH. 
Council Member Cormack suggested the messaging contain terms that 
laypeople understood.  She inquired whether the four-year ramp up was based 
on the take rate changing over time or the rate that the network was built 
out. 
Mr. Honker replied both.   
Council Member Cormack requested an estimate of the date on which the first 
customer was going to connect to FTTH. 
Mr. Honker answered the middle of 2023.  If the Council chose to utilize a pilot 
program, the first connection date was sooner. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether homes with underground utilities 
were able to access better internet service. 
Mr. Honker related that the survey was going to provide that type of 
information.   
Council Member Cormack requested the anticipated method of financing FTTH. 
Mr. Yuan replied a revenue bond. 
Council Member Cormack asked if capital markets considered Enterprise Funds 
independent of the City or as a part of the City. 
Mr. Shikada reported more work was needed regarding financing.   
Council Member Cormack felt exploring FTTH without incurring debt was 
prudent.  She was not prepared to direct Staff to establish the model until the 
results of the next phase were available. 
Vice Mayor Burt remarked that bonding against the profits of the backbone 
was possible, and interest rates were favorable.  He recalled prior information 
that three competing ISPs saved consumers approximately $10 million 
annually, whether consumers selected a commercial or municipal ISP. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
Mr. Honker advised that consumers typically saved approximately $10 per 
month through additional competition in the market.   
Vice Mayor Burt believed messaging needed to emphasize the benefit of 
increased competition for all internet consumers.  The backbone not only 
increased revenue but also increased the value of being located in Palo Alto 
for businesses.  He reiterated that moving forward with FTTH and utilizing 
funds from the Fiber Fund to restore vital City services were possible.   
Council Member Stone concurred with Mayor DuBois' comments and 
consideration of utilizing the Fiber Fund for City services.  The past year in a 
pandemic demonstrated needs for better internet service and a diversity of 
revenue streams.  He inquired whether revenue from FTTH was consistent 
through economic downturns. 
Mr. Honker replied yes.   
Council Member Stone inquired whether municipal ISPs achieved a higher 
market share than private ISPs.   
Mr. Honker related that municipal take rates averaged 40 to 50 percent.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Motion approved FTTH service despite 
the results of Part A of the Motion. 
Mayor DuBois clarified that the Council needed to approve detailed plans and 
a business model prior to FTTH being implemented. 
Mr. Batchelor added that Staff and the consultant were going to prepare the 
items in Part A and return to the Council with the findings to discuss costs. 
Council Member Tanaka expressed concern regarding the City taking on 
additional debt at the current time and broadband becoming obsolete 
technology.  He wanted to understand the impact of the capital cost on the 
monthly rate.  He asked about plans to streamline the permitting process for 
ISPs other than the City. 
Mr. Batchelor reported Staff did not consider that.   
Council Member Tanaka was interested in increasing competition and lowering 
rates for consumers. 
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
XX to add to the Motion, “look at streamlining the process for FTTH.” 
AMENDMENT FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Motion referred to a dig once policy. 
Mayor DuBois indicated the Dig Once Ordinance was applicable. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change Motion, Part B to read as, “Direct Staff 
to return to Council with a City-operated … .” 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kou to approve and direct Staff to pursue build out of the City fiber backbone 
in a manner designed to support citywide Fiber-to-the-Home (FTTH), including 
approve the near-term 12-month workplan outlined in the report and establish 
a City-operated Internet Service Provider (ISP) model to offer FTTH service 
within five years. 
A. 
Perform the following tasks by March 31, 2022:  
i. 
Combine Phases 2 and 4 of the Magellan contract (C20176363) to 
provide detailed engineering design of the City’s fiber backbone 
and FTTH distribution network;  
ii. 
Complete a detailed City-operated ISP model, to include a 
combination of insource and outsource functions;  
iii. 
Complete a residential and commercial broadband survey;  
iv. 
Complete a risk and mitigation analysis of City-operated ISP 
model;  
v. 
Determine the best financing model, including availability of 
federal and state funding options;  
B. 
Direct Staff to return to Council with a City-operated Internet Service 
Provider (ISP) model to offer FTTH service within five years; and  
C. 
Per Council prior direction as part of the Community and Economic 
Recovery work plan, Staff will prioritize and accelerate community 
education and engagement regarding FTTH. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
9. 
Colleagues' Memo Requesting Council Refer to the Policy and Services 
Committee a Proposed Program Allowing Neighbors to Directly Connect 
With Each Other, and a Potential Volunteer Network for the City. 
Council Member Stone remarked that the Colleagues' Memo was intended to 
strengthen and embolden residents, neighborhoods, neighborhood groups, 
and volunteer programs through understanding services provided by 
volunteers, identifying gaps in services, and engaging the community in next 
steps.  Community members provided some helpful suggestions in response 
to the Colleagues' Memo.   
Council Member Cormack noted many people were already doing this work, 
and providing a method for them to connect and support the City was going 
to be helpful.  This was also a way for students to engage in community 
service.   
Annette Glanckopf requested the Council not refer the Colleagues' Memo to 
the Policy and Services Committee (P&S) but support existing programs.  The 
Colleagues' Memo duplicated existing programs.  An additional program 
requiring Staff support was not feasible given the proposed Budget cuts.   
Sandra Slater hoped the proposed project helped coordinate and amplify 
various existing programs and led people to volunteer with existing programs.   
Council Member Kou related that the Block Preparedness Coordinator's (BPC) 
role was to communicate with neighbors and prepare for disasters when there 
was no emergency.  The proposal duplicated existing services.   
Vice Mayor Burt felt the City needed to provide more support for neighborhood 
volunteers and the community.  The Know Your Neighbor Grant Program and 
Town Halls were eliminated.  The City needed to invest in engaging residents 
of multifamily dwellings and ethnic and immigrant communities.  He supported 
a program that focused on the City leveraging and engaging neighborhood 
groups and volunteers and identifying gaps in services.  However, the first 
goal was to restore vital programs throughout the City.   
Mayor DuBois was more supportive of assessing current volunteer structures.  
He suggested the Council review a previous Colleagues' Memo regarding 
strengthening neighborhood volunteers.  The BPC Program needed 
strengthening and reinvigorating.  He supported resuming the Know Your 
Neighbor Grant Program. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
refer to the Policy and Services Committee to: 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
A. 
Recommend strategies to support and strengthen neighborhood 
programs and associations; 
B. 
Identify gaps in existing neighborhood-based services; and 
C. 
Evaluate new strategies, including those proposed in the Colleague’s 
Memo and others, to expand the role of neighborhood volunteers.  
Vice Mayor Burt hoped to restore funding for programs that fostered 
engagement among neighbors.   
Council Member Cormack believed existing volunteers needed a way to 
connect.  The Emergency Services Volunteers (ESV) Program needed to be 
reviewed to ensure training produced the desired outcomes.  The community's 
desire to help needed direction.   
Council Member Stone commented that the Motion encapsulated the spirit of 
the Colleagues' Memo.  The goal was to improve volunteer groups and to 
promote greater volunteerism.   
MOTION PASSED:  7-0  
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack reported as of May 17, 2021, the regional water 
supply was below the average normal level.  The San Francisco Public Utilities 
Commission (SFPUC) requested consumers voluntarily reduce water use.  
Drought conditions were worse in other areas of California.   
Council Member Kou suggested Council Members serving as Block 
Preparedness Coordinators (BPC) introduce themselves to neighbors.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:38 P.M. in honor of Joan 
Baez.  
 
ATTEST:                                             
APPROVED:           
____________________ 
 
 
____________________                                 
City Clerk                                              Mayor 
NOTE: Action minutes are prepared in accordance with Palo Alto Municipal 
Code (PAMC) 2.04.160(a) and (b). Summary minutes (sense) are prepared in 
accordance with PAMC Section 2.04.160(c). Beginning in January 2018, in 
accordance with Ordinance No. 5423, the City Council found action minutes 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
  Summary Minutes: 05/24/2021 
and the video/audio recordings of Council proceedings to be the official records 
of both Council and committee proceedings. These recordings are available on 
the City’s website. 
