CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 28 
Special Meeting 
June 7, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:02 P.M. 
Participating Remotely:  Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None. 
Oral Communications 
Rhoda Fry remarked that a portion of Lehigh's quarry property was located in 
Palo Alto.  Lehigh's proposal impacted the future expansion of the Black 
Mountain Trail.  Lehigh was one of the state's worst polluters.   
Mark Shull encouraged residents to attend the virtual meeting with San 
Francisco 
International 
Airport 
(SFO) 
regarding 
the 
Ground-Based 
Augmentation System (GBAS).  It was time for the City to fight for its place 
on the SFO Roundtable. 
Charlie Weidanz announced World Music Month began the previous weekend 
and continued on Saturdays and Sundays in June 2021.   
Rebecca Ward urged the Council to become a member of the SFO Roundtable.  
Aircraft traffic was impacting the residents of Palo Alto.  Membership in the 
SFO Roundtable was an opportunity to address the impacts of aircraft traffic. 
Terry Holzemer urged the Council to support hiring an in-house Economic 
Development Staff member.  A consultant was not going to focus on residents' 
concerns.  The Council needed to reexamine the closure of California Avenue 
and University Avenue to vehicular traffic.   
Eileen Richardson, Downtown Streets Team, apologized for the blemish that 
incidents involving employees left on the organization and its purpose.  The 
Board and she addressed the incidents with training and implementation of 
best practices and compiled a number of documents that demonstrated the 
organization's evolution and dedication to improvement.  The documents were 
available upon request. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Winter Dellenbach questioned the Veterans Administration's May 7, 2021 
statement regarding the fuel spill when containment booms were installed in 
the Boulware Park segment of the creek.  Water testing data was made 
available; however, it raised many questions.  The Parks and Recreation 
Commission and the Storm Water Management Oversight Committee needed 
to be involved in the matter.   
John Norman stated Black people were getting an advantage over Asians and 
White people.  Segregation was needed so it was not equal.   
Minutes Approval 
1. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the May 24, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to approve the 
Action Minutes for the May 24, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Kou registered no votes on Agenda Item Numbers 3, 9 and 
10. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 3. 
Mayor DuBois registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 9. 
Roland Lebrun requested someone disable closed captioning in Zoom. 
Jeremy Erman, addressing Agenda Item Number 7, felt the Agenda Item was 
hypocritical in light of the City's attempt to evict Cubberley tenants in 2020 
while retaining control of one building, the gym, and the theatre.   
Angie Evans, addressing Agenda Item Number 9 on behalf of Palo Alto 
Forward, hoped the Council extended the closure of California Avenue and 
University Avenue to vehicular traffic indefinitely to preserve the vibrancy of 
the business districts.  Families with children under age 12, for whom there 
was not a COVID-19 vaccination, needed a public space that was safe for 
children.   
Carol Scott, addressing Agenda Item Number 9, objected to the City Manager 
meeting with the business community only.  The proposal affected traffic, 
safety, and air pollution, all of which impacted residents living adjacent to 
California Avenue.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 2-10. 
2. 
Approval of an Effluent Transfer Agreement Between the City of Palo 
Alto and the City of Los Altos.  
3. 
Approval of Contract Number C21179800A With Pacific International 
Electric Company, Inc. in the Amount of $943,639 for the Underground 
District 46 Completion Project; and Authorization to Execute and 
Negotiate Related Change Orders in the Amount of $188,728 for a Total 
Not-to-Exceed Amount of $1,132,367; and Approval of a Budget 
Amendment in the Electric Fund.  
4. 
Recommendation to Authorize the City Manager or Designee to Execute 
a Five-year General Services Agreement With Western Machinery 
Electric Inc. for Repair and Maintenance of Electricity Generators at the 
Municipal Service Center in an Amount Not-to-Exceed $592,248; and to 
Negotiate and Execute one or More Task Orders for Additional Services 
as Needed in an Amount Not-to-Exceed $300,000, for a Total Not-to-
Exceed Amount of $892,248; and Approve a Budget Amendment in the 
Electric Fund. 
5. 
Approval of a Design-build Contract With Johnson Controls Fire 
Protection, LP in the Amount of $517,280, and Authorization for the City 
Manager to Negotiate and Execute Related Change Orders for a Not-to-
Exceed Amount of $51,728, for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of 
$569,008 for the Civic Center Fire Life Safety Upgrades, Capital 
Improvement Program Project (PE-18016).  
6. 
Approval of Amendment Number 1 to Contract Number S20176879 With 
Johnson Controls Fire Protection, LP to Increase the Contract Amount 
by $86,847 for a Revised Three-year Contract in a Total Amount Not-
to-Exceed $265,584 for the Provision of Fire Sprinkler System 
Inspections and Repair Services.  
7. 
Policy and Services Committee Recommends Approval of a Rent 
Forgiveness Program for Tenants in City Buildings and Approve a Budget 
Amendment in the General Fund. 
8. 
Adoption of the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) Transition Plan 
Update for City Buildings, Parking Facilities, Parks, and Public Right-of-
Way Sidewalks and Curb Ramps. 
9. 
Adoption of an Ordinance and Resolution 9962 Temporarily Continuing: 
1) Uses of Public and Private Property for Outdoor Dining, Retail, and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Personal Services; and 2) the Pilot Parklet Program Past the end of the 
Local Emergency. 
10. 
SECOND READING: Ordinance 5525 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council 
of the City of Palo Alto Updating an Emergency Permit Extension 
Ordinance in Response to Changes to Santa Clara County Health Orders 
(FIRST READING: May 24, 2021 PASSED: 7-0).” 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 2, 4-8:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 3:  5-2 Kou, Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 9:  5-2 DuBois, Kou no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 10:  6-1 Kou no 
Council Member Kou felt the Council needed to defer the project noted in 
Agenda Item Number 3.  October 2021 was an appropriate sunset date for 
Agenda Item Number 9.  Engagement with the neighbors was problematic.  
With regard to Agenda Item Number 10, health orders allowed development 
to resume early in the pandemic.  Therefore, extending the expiration of 
permits was not necessary.   
Council Member Tanaka indicated deferring the undergrounding project did 
not affect residents but reduced Operating Reserves by $500,000. 
Mayor DuBois related that the Council did not make required findings that 
roadways were not needed.  He expressed concern regarding the use of public 
rights-of-way and business locations in other cities recovering faster than Palo 
Alto locations.   
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported free COVID-19 vaccinations were 
available throughout Santa Clara County.  Free COVID-19 testing was 
available at the Cubberley Pavilion.  Staff was reviewing new protocols 
released by Cal/OSHA.  The Governor's Executive Order was probably not 
going to be lifted on June 15, 2021, which meant public meetings were going 
to continue in the virtual format.  The Summit on Women and Girls was 
scheduled for June 12, 2021.  The City was hosting a community meeting with 
San Francisco International Airport (SFO) regarding the Ground-Based 
Augmentation System (GBAS) on June 9, 2021.  World Music Month was going 
to be celebrated on Saturdays and Sundays in June 2021.  The center segment 
of the Bike Bridge over Highway 101 was delayed in reaching Palo Alto.  
Currently, installation of the center segment was scheduled overnight on June 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
12-13, 2021.  The City was designated a Gold-Level Bicycle Friendly 
Community.  Upcoming Agenda Items for the Council included the North 
Ventura Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP), the Budget, changes to the City's 
Local Emergency Proclamation, and installation of electric vehicle (EV) 
superchargers at the Bryant Street Garage.   
Action Items 
11. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Resolution 9963 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council 
of the City of Palo Alto to Suspend Assessments for Fiscal Year 2022 for 
the Downtown Business Improvement District (BID) (CONTINUED FROM 
JUNE 1, 2021).” 
David Ramberg, Administrative Services Assistant Director, reported the 
Council preliminarily approved suspension of Fiscal Year (FY) 2022 
assessments for the Downtown Business Improvement District (BID) on May 
17, 2021.  In June 2021, the Council suspended BID assessments for FY 2021.   
Public Hearing opened and closed without public speakers at 5:45 P.M. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to 
adopt a Resolution temporarily suspending the levy of assessments in Fiscal 
Year 2022 in connection with the Downtown Palo Alto Business Improvement 
District (BID). 
Council Member Cormack noted that funding was sufficient for the remaining 
expenses and that data was going to be collected.   
Mayor DuBois asked if Business Registry fees were suspended for businesses 
registering on time but remained in effect for businesses not registering 
timely. 
Mr. Ramberg replied yes.  At the Council's direction, Staff extended the 
deadline to July 15, 2021.   
Vice Mayor Burt inquired regarding the possibility of continuing the Summer 
Concert Series without the BID's support. 
Mr. Ramberg agreed to provide information at a later time. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council took a break at 5:50 P.M. and returned at 6:05 P.M 
12. 
855 El Camino Real (20PLN-00252): Adoption of an Ordinance 
Amending Chapters 18.04 and 18.16 of the Municipal Code to Allow 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Some Ground Floor Medical Office (“Retail Health”) Uses With a 
Commensurate Increase in the Overall Office use Allowed at the Site 
Subject to Limitations. Environmental Assessment: Exempt From the 
Provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) in 
Accordance With Guideline Section 15301 (Existing Facilities). Zoning 
District: CC (Community Commercial). 
Rachel Tanner, Planning and Development Services Assistant Director, 
reported the Applicant's request was to replace ground-floor retail and retail-
like uses with medical uses within Town & Country Village.  On March 22, 
2021, the Council declined medical office uses but supported the concept of a 
retail health use.  The Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) 
recommended the definition of retail health exclude convalescence, use of 
general anesthesia, emergency services, and urgent care; limiting retail health 
uses to 10 percent of the existing ground-floor area of Town & Country Village; 
not allowing retail health uses to occupy spaces directly facing El Camino Real 
and Embarcadero Road; a retail health use provide 750 square feet or 20 
percent of total space, whichever was less, for retail sales and displays; a 
requirement for transparent storefront glazing or retail displays to extend a 
minimum depth of 3 feet; a requirement for tenant leases to be established 
by December 31, 2023; and further study of extending retail health uses to 
other areas of the City.  The PTC split 4-3 regarding the recommendations, 
with opposition noting retail may recover, retail and retail-like uses needed to 
be preserved, uncertainty about uses allowed as a retail health use, retail 
health uses may harm the overall retail environment, and a desire to refine 
the definition of a retail health use.  The Applicant proposed modifying the 
definition to allow urgent care if it was associated with a primary care use.   
Dean Rubinson, Ellis Partners, reviewed the history of the application and 
comments from four tenant representatives provided on May 12, 2021.  In 
2017, retail sales began decreasing while the average retail vacancy began 
increasing in Town & Country Village.  Based on the national increase in online 
retail sales from 2018 to 2020, e-commerce was the primary cause of 
declining sales in Town & Country Village.  Health retail tenants were thriving 
and invented for synergy with retail centers.  The Council's and PTC's changes 
were acceptable, and the Applicant requested the Council allow urgent care 
services associated with a primary care use.  In a worst case scenario, health 
retail uses reduced Sales Tax revenue by $39,000.  However, health retail 
uses were likely to increase retail sales at other uses in Town & Country 
Village, prevent additional tenant failures, and increase overall Sales Tax 
revenues.   
Hamilton Hitchings believed the financial viability of Town & Country Village 
was important.  Limiting health retail uses to the second floor was less 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
intrusive than ground-floor.  He opposed the Applicant's proposed change to 
allow urgent care associated with a primary care use.   
Terry Holzemer opposed the proposed Ordinance because recovery from the 
pandemic was just beginning.   
Jeff Levinsky noted that Town & Country Village was crowded over the past 
few weeks.  He questioned whether rents were appropriate to attract 
businesses.  The proposed Ordinance created a monopoly. 
Rebecca Sanders preferred to retain all retail uses.  Ventura residents were 
concerned about the proposal.   
Vice Mayor Burt asked if the vacancy rate included the three new restaurants. 
Mr. Rubinson answered no.  If they were included, the vacancy rate dropped 
from 21 percent to around 18 percent.   
Vice Mayor Burt indicated that the proposed definition categorized health retail 
as a form of medical office rather than retail.   
Ms. Tanner explained that in the Municipal Code, retail health was going to be 
placed under medical office to reflect retail health's relationship to medical 
office.  However, the definition distinguished retail health from medical office.   
Vice Mayor Burt suggested retail health may need to be defined as a form of 
retail rather than medical office.  Under the proposed language, a retail health 
use needed to provide a storefront or a sales area, but the sales area was not 
required to be located at the very front of the space.  He inquired whether 
Staff discussed a requirement for drop-in services.   
Ms. Tanner indicated the PTC did not discuss specific operations but discussed 
a retail sales area.   
Vice Mayor Burt suggested walk-in services made the use more retail-like but 
did not preclude services by appointment. 
Ms. Tanner advised that neither the PTC nor Staff considered operational 
standards.   
Vice Mayor Burt inquired regarding consideration of extended hours of 
operation to align with the retail environment. 
Ms. Tanner indicated hours of operation were not proposed. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if the size of 5,000 square feet was considered in the 
context of existing retail spaces in Town & Country Village.   
Ms. Tanner noted the average size of spaces was approximately 2,000 square 
feet.  A maximum size of 5,000 square feet allowed one use to occupy two 
spaces. 
Vice Mayor Burt expressed concern that 5,000 square feet placed a retail 
health use as one of the largest tenants in Town & Country Village.   
Mr. Rubinson clarified that Trader Joe's occupied approximately 12,000 square 
feet while CVS occupied approximately 18,000 square feet.  Several other 
tenants occupied spaces of 5,000 square feet.  Medical office and retail health 
uses were not allowed to occupy space on the second floor because there were 
no elevators to provide access to the second floor as required by the 
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA).   
Council Member Stone asked if vacancy rates for retail spaces across the City 
were beginning to fall. 
Ms. Tanner reported Town & Country Village's vacancy rate was higher than 
other areas of the City, which reported vacancy rates of 10 percent and 15 
percent.  A vacancy rate of 10 percent or higher was not good for a retail area.  
Determining a trend was premature at the current time. 
Council Member Stone stated the definition of retail health use appeared very 
broad.  He requested examples of retail health uses under the proposed 
definition. 
Ms. Tanner explained that the PTC did not want to exclude types of retail 
health simply because Commissioners and Staff were not aware of them.  The 
definition attempted to discourage certain types of medical uses and 
encourage uses with a strong retail component.  An optometrist was an 
example of a retail health use that provided shopping and services with or 
without an appointment.   
Council Member Stone preferred a retail use with a medical component.  The 
proposed definition was a medical use with a slight retail component.   
Council Member Filseth remarked that the growth drivers for Sales Tax were 
business-to-business and to some extent restaurants and food over the past 
decade.  Sales Tax from general retail uses appeared to be essentially flat.  
The proposed definition of retail health appeared to be a medical office.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Council Member Cormack requested an example of an urgent care associated 
with a primary care use. 
Ms. Tanner understood some medical uses provided urgent care services to 
their patients or to the public.   
Mr. Rubinson explained that primary care services were a significant 
component of some medical office uses, but the uses also offered urgent care 
services.  Precluding urgent care services could exclude some medical uses 
from becoming tenants at Town & Country Village.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether small labs performing basic tests 
were potential tenants. 
Ms. Tanner suggested the PTC struggled with separating retail and medical 
components to draft a definition of retail health use.   
Council Member Cormack understood that retail health was a medical office 
use with a retail component.  She supported the Staff recommendation.   
Mayor DuBois inquired regarding application of the California Environmental 
Quality Act's (CEQA) substantial change in use standard to retail health. 
Ms. Tanner explained that the environmental impacts for a retail health use 
were similar to those generated by allowed retail and retail-like uses.   
Mayor DuBois asked if ambulances were likely to take patients to a retail 
health use with urgent care services.   
Ms. Tanner did not believe urgent care services were equivalent to emergency 
room services.   
Samuel Gutierrez clarified that the PTC discussed urgent care and emergency 
services and determined that ambulances and incapacitated patients were not 
compatible with a retail environment.  Urgent care services were more for 
stitching cuts.  A retail health use did not significantly alter the shopping 
center's function.  The parameters for retail health limited the types of uses.  
The applicant requested a text change, not a redevelopment of the shopping 
center. 
Mayor DuBois noted the expanded scope of a retail health use.  Adopting an 
Ordinance for one parcel was not a good process.  This issue was not a priority 
in relation to other items on the work plan.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Applicant lowered rents to attract 
tenants. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Jim Ellison, Ellis Partners, reported rents were down about 20 to 25 percent. 
Council Member Tanaka related that his investigation into vacancies and rents 
revealed landlords were reducing rents and offering to pay for tenant 
improvements to attract tenants.  The retail health concept was intended to 
generate foot traffic for shopping centers.  The situation was dire, and the 
Council needed to move quickly.   
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to:  
A. 
Find the attached Ordinance exempt from the California Environmental 
Quality Act (CEQA) in accordance with CEQA Guidelines Section 15301 
(existing facilities);  
B. 
Adopt the attached Ordinance creating a “retail health” definition 
allowing a limited amount of retail health uses on the ground floor at 
Town and Country Shopping Center; and  
C. 
Provide direction to Staff on whether to study expansion of retail health 
uses to other shopping centers or commercial districts. 
Council Member Cormack related that retail health was limited to 10 percent 
of ground-floor space.  People were likely to patronize these uses, and they 
were likely to be attractive. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council 
Member Filseth to deny the application.  
Council Member Kou suggested other shopping centers were going to want 
retail health uses.  Retail health uses did not serve residents' needs and did 
not generate Sales Tax revenue.  After June 20, 2022, a retail health use 
required a Conditional Use Permit, which was in effect permanent. 
Council Member Filseth commented that a lot of time was being spent on a 
project with a small impact.  The PTC had difficulty defining retail health.   
Council Member Stone noted other shopping centers in the City were doing 
well.  The Applicant needed to demonstrate its efforts to attract tenants before 
the City amended the Municipal Code.  The prospect of economic recovery 
improved significantly since the Council considered the proposed Ordinance in 
March 2021.   
Vice Mayor Burt wanted the PTC to provide a nuanced definition of health 
retail.  The PTC provided guidance that reflected their values rather than 
Council direction.  The definition was too broad, and someone was going to 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
use it to provide services that were not intended.  The Council needed to 
reexamine the need for adjustments in the fall of 2021.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether Director Lait remarked during the 
Council's last discussion of this project that the Council should not refer the 
item to the PTC if it was not going to adopt the Ordinance. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, answered yes. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff anticipated the economic development 
consultant's work including retail health.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported the Council direction was not specific to 
retail health.  The broader function of exploring the applicability of retail health 
as an area of growth was appropriate for the general topic. 
Council Member Cormack proposed amending the Substitute Motion to direct 
Staff to study the expansion of retail health uses to shopping centers and 
commercial districts as part of the Request for Proposals (RFP) for economic 
development assistance.   
Council Member Filseth did not accept the proposed Amendment.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION PASSED:  5-2 Cormack, Tanaka no 
13. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Resolution 9964 and Resolution 9965 Adopting the 
2020 Urban Water Management Plan and Water Shortage Contingency 
Plan. 
Dean Batchelor, Utilities Director, reported every agency in California was 
required to submit an Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP) and a Water 
Shortage Contingency Plan (WSCP) every five years.   
Karla Dailey, Senior Resource Planner, advised that the deadline to submit the 
two plans was June 30, 2021.  The plans demonstrated the adequacy of the 
City's water supply to meet its needs.  The plans were revised to reflect 
updated population and employment projections, impacts of the 2015 drought 
and resulting conservation, the Northwest County Recycled Water Strategic 
Plan, and the agreement with Valley Water and Mountain View.  Due to 
drought conditions, Staff was going to increase education and community 
outreach regarding water conservation programs.  The UWMP analysis 
assumed the State implemented the Bay Delta Plan by 2023.  The five-year 
drought risk assessment projected water demand was going to exceed supply 
beginning in 2023.  The WSCP described actions the City planned to take for 
six levels of water supply shortages.  The City was not restricted to 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
implementing only the actions listed in the WSCP.  The City was allowed to 
amend the WSCP at any time.   
Greg Scharff, Utilities Advisory Commissioner, advised that the Utilities 
Advisory Commission (UAC) unanimously recommended the Council support 
the UWMP and WSCP.  If the plans were not submitted by the deadline, the 
City may not be eligible for State funding, which the City was seeking.  The 
UAC expressed concern regarding the drastic water reductions, but 
recommending approval of the plans did not seem to commit the City to 
anything. 
Public Hearing opened at 7:44 P.M. 
Dave Warner remarked that the City continued to overestimate its water 
demand by as much as one-third for 2045.  Overestimating demand was 
financially and environmentally costly and led to water rationing.   
Peter Drekmeier, Tuolumne River Trust Policy Director, commented that water 
demand projections were almost always inflated.  The San Francisco Public 
Utilities Commission (SFPUC) was able to manage a six-year drought with the 
Bay Delta Plan in effect, without rationing, and without developing new water 
sources.   
Stephen Rosenblum stated that the SFPUC consistently utilized the designed 
drought to scare people into opposing the Bay Delta Plan, which the Council 
supported several years ago.  He urged the Council to consider amending the 
UWMP to include realistic water demand projections.   
Public Hearing closed at 7:51 P.M. 
Vice Mayor Burt expressed concern regarding the disconnect between 
projections for increased water use and the actual decrease in water use.  It 
was possible the projections were going to impact the City's water allocation 
during a drought.  He requested Staff comment regarding the reason for 
projecting an increase in purchases and the unintended impact that may have 
on drought allocations. 
Ms. Dailey related that all demand projections were wrong, but Staff was 
comfortable with the projection because it was consistent with the trend for 
decreasing per capita water use.  The need to be consistent with the 
Comprehensive Plan and the enormous pressure to increase housing 
production overwhelmed an overall decrease in water use slightly. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if Staff factored in the type of housing.  Single-family 
homes consumed more water per capita than multifamily units.  The City's 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
housing growth was projected to be overwhelmingly multifamily units.  The 
additional residents were likely to consume less water per capita than existing 
residents. 
Ms. Dailey concurred.  Models showed per capita water use was decreasing.  
The model was very robust and data driven.   
Vice Mayor Burt asked why this model was going to be more accurate than 
previous models. 
Ms. Dailey explained that discussion of supply projects included a range of 
possible demands rather than only the demand contained in the UWMP. 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether lowering the demand forecast meant 
the City was likely to implement less stringent rationing in the event of a 
drought and whether the City was able to utilize a less conservative demand 
forecast in order to lessen rationing. 
Ms. Dailey indicated the percentage cutbacks contained in the UWMP were 
based on system-wide demand projections and SFPUC's predictions for 
cutbacks.  If Palo Alto lowered its demand forecast, the percentage cutbacks 
were not going to change.  SFPUC provided the percentage numbers based on 
a regional view of the system.  If SFPUC redid its analysis, all agencies needed 
to lower their demand projections.  If a water supply shortage was at or below 
20 percent, one formula determined the division of water between SFPUC and 
wholesale customers, and another formula determined the division of water 
among the 26 Bay Area Water Supply and Conservation Agency (BAWSCA) 
agencies.  If the shortage was greater than 20 percent, the partners 
negotiated the division of water. 
Council Member Cormack requested the anticipated completion date of the 
study and anticipated outcomes. 
Nicole Sandkulla, Chief Executive Officer/General Manager of BAWSCA, 
understood that the multiyear climate change risk vulnerability assessment 
was scheduled for publication in the summer.  SFPUC was going to utilize the 
study to inform policy discussions. 
Council Member Cormack noted the importance of understanding the science 
for the future as well as the past.  She asked if the City implemented drought 
rate structures in the past. 
Lisa Bilir, Resource Planner, indicated drought rate structures were 
implemented in 2016 and 2017.  If necessary, the Council activated and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
imposed the drought surcharge.  The rate structures depended on the cutback 
published by SFPUC and primarily affected Palo Alto's higher tier usages. 
Council Member Cormack noted the 2015 drought damaged the City's canopy.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if residents were really expected to cut back 
water usage by 40 percent. 
Ms. Dailey advised that the State imposed a target cutback of 23 percent in 
2015, and the Palo Alto community reduced water usage by almost 30 
percent.  The 40 percent cutback was higher than anything previously 
required. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the consequences of not meeting 
cutback requirements in a drought. 
Ms. Sandkulla reported in the event of mandatory rationing, SFPUC was 
allowed to levy fines on member agencies that did not achieve the desired 
reduction.  Fines were determined when mandatory rationing was declared, 
but 10 to 15 times the current water rate was discussed as a potential fine.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding the likelihood that the five-year 
drought assessment was accurate. 
Ms. Sandkulla explained that the Bay Delta Plan was a significant impact to 
water supply and water supply reliability.  BAWSCA was working to remove 
the region from this type of impact by locating an alternative water source 
that met the Bay Delta Plan's objectives without the water supply cost.   
Council Member Tanaka asked about the impacts of the City releasing some 
of its water rights. 
Ms. Dailey answered almost none. 
Council Member Stone inquired whether COVID-19 and telecommuting were 
likely to materially affect projections for job growth and population.   
Ms. Sandkulla advised that the impacts of COVID-19 and the lack of a rebound 
from the 2015 drought were going to be included in sensitivity scenarios for 
models.  If SFPUC altered their design drought and it materially impacted the 
assessment for reliability, SFPUC provided that to all partner agencies who 
used the information to update their UWMPs.   
Council Member Stone requested clarification of a "normal year." 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Ms. Dailey indicated average year was a better term.  In non-drought years, 
the City did not have a water supply shortage. 
Mayor DuBois asked if the model was the same one that the Association of 
Bay Governments (ABAG) used to forecast housing units.   
Ms. Dailey stated Staff utilized Comprehensive Plan employment and 
population numbers, which ABAG provided, and compared those to the 
Housing Work Plan, which assumed the addition of 300 housing units or 500 
people per year.  Unfortunately, the Housing Work Plan numbers were lower 
than the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA).   
Mayor DuBois inquired regarding the Staff Report not mentioning the large 
potable recyclable water plant.   
Ms. Dailey advised that the large plant was not going to serve Palo Alto.  The 
UWMP discussed the large plant in broad terms.   
Mayor DuBois advised that the Valley Water Board was scheduled to consider 
declaring a water shortage for Santa Clara County on June 9, 2021.   
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
adopt a Resolution adopting the 2020 Urban Water Management Plan and a 
Resolution adopting the Water Shortage Contingency Plan. 
Mayor DuBois preferred to approve the plans and amend them when 
information was available.   
Vice Mayor Burt requested Staff comment regarding an appendix that 
analyzed the impact of SFPUC reducing the length of the design drought by a 
year. 
Ms. Dailey commented that there was not a disadvantage to preparing an 
appendix. 
AMENDMENT:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Stone 
to direct the City to send a letter to the San Francisco Public Utilities 
Commission (SFPUC) that includes an appendix in the plan that would analyze 
the impact of the SFPUC reducing the design drought by one year. 
Vice Mayor Burt related that the SFPUC's adoption of the appendix allowed the 
City to favorably modify its UWMP.   
Council Member Cormack saw no point to directing Staff to send a letter when 
the Board was meeting the following day at 1:30 P.M.  She encouraged 
colleagues to consider that the model could go either way. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, noted the Council's practice to draft letters and 
requested Council direction. 
Vice Mayor Burt felt the Council's practice of authorizing Staff to write the 
letter and the Mayor to approve it was appropriate.  He inquired whether the 
SFPUC was allowed to add an appendix after approving its UWMP. 
Ms. Sandkulla explained that an amendment to the UWMP required 
publication, a review period, a public hearing, and submitting the amended 
UWMP to the State. 
Vice Mayor Burt requested Mr. Drekmeier's opinion of the utility of sending a 
letter given that the Board was meeting the following day. 
Mr. Drekmeier advised that, if the Council approved sending a letter, he was 
going to refer to it during the SFPUC Board meeting.  A letter was likely to 
have some influence with the Board. 
Council Member Tanaka requested Commissioner Scharff's opinion of sending 
a letter. 
Mr. Scharff advised that the UAC did not discuss the issue, and he preferred 
not to provide his personal opinion. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE AMENDMENT WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change the Amendment to read, “to request Staff 
provide a letter for the Mayor’s approval to the San Francisco Public Utilities 
Commission… .” 
Council Member Tanaka asked if reducing the design drought by one year 
meant reducing the drought forecast by one year. 
Vice Mayor Burt answered yes.  Doing that improved the City's water 
allocation. 
Ms. Dailey clarified that reducing the design drought changed the projected 
water supply shortfall. 
Ms. Sandkulla explained that the SFPUC utilized a design drought to determine 
the system's performance during a future drought scenario.  The design 
drought was 8.5 years long.  The long-term forecasting provided projected 
demand.  Projected demand analyzed with the design drought determined the 
projected shortfall.  Rerunning the model with a 7.5-year design drought 
assumed future cutbacks were reduced in a drought scenario.  If the 
information was contained in an appendix to the SFPUC UWMP, one was able 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
to refer to the information if the SFPUC adopted that change to the design 
drought as a policy in the fall. 
Council Member Filseth suggested Staff utilize Menlo Park's letter as a 
template. 
AMENDMENT AS AMENDED:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council 
Member Stone to request Staff provide a letter for the Mayor’s approval to the 
San Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC) that includes an appendix 
in the plan that would analyze the impact of the SFPUC reducing the design 
drought by one year. 
AMENDMENT AS AMENDED PASSED:  5-2 Cormack, Tanaka no 
Council Member Cormack requested the Mayor split the Motion. 
Mayor DuBois agreed to do so. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to: 
A. 
Adopt a Resolution adopting the 2020 Urban Water Management Plan 
and a Resolution adopting the Water Shortage Contingency Plan; and 
B. 
Request Staff provide a letter for the Mayors approval to the San 
Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC) that includes an appendix 
in the plan that would analyze the impact of the SFPUC reducing the 
design drought by one year. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED FOR MOTION, PART A:  7-0 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED FOR MOTION, PART B:  5-2 Cormack, 
Tanaka no 
14. 
City Council Review of the Finance Committee's Recommended Fiscal 
Year (FY) 2022 Operating & Capital Budgets and Municipal Fee 
Schedule; Direction to Staff Regarding Preparation of the Final Budget 
for Council Adoption on June 21, 2021. 
Kiely Nose, Administrative Services Director/Interim Assistant City Manager, 
reported the Agenda Item allowed the Council to adjust the Fiscal Year (FY) 
2022 Proposed Budget following the Finance Committee's final review.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Christine Paras, Assistant Director of Administrative Services, advised that 
Staff had not reached agreements with labor groups regarding a zero wage 
increase for FY 2022.  The Finance Committee recommended the Council 
approve the FY 2022 Operating and Capital Budgets, Municipal Fee Schedule, 
and FY 2022-2026 Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) with amendments outlined 
in the Staff Report and an amendment to utilize unallocated funds of $1.7 
million for salary expenses if agreements with labor groups were not reached 
or to place the $1.7 million in the Budget Stabilization Reserve (BSR) and 
rename the BSR as the Council Recovery Reserve if agreements with labor 
groups were reached.  The Finance Committee also directed Staff to prepare 
two scenarios for refurbishing the Roth Building.  Current adjustments 
included a 60/40 split of American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funds, a $2.5 
million draw from the BSR, a $25,000 reduction of the Council Contingency, 
and funding restored to various programs as outlined in the Staff Report.  
Additional adjustments affected the Capital Improvement Fund and SUMC 
funds, the Gas Operating Funding, the University Avenue Parking Permit Fund, 
the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Fund, the State Gas Tax 
Fund and the Capital Improvement Fund, and Utilities Funds.  The first 
scenario for refurbishing the Roth Building was a $4 million loan from the Fiber 
Optics Fund at 0 percent interest.  Scenario 1 included repayment of the loan 
if the Palo Alto History Museum (PAHM) received a federal community project 
grant.  Propositions 26 and 218 did not regulate the use of monies in the Fiber 
Optics Fund.  The soonest that grants were going to be awarded was October 
2021.  The Fiber Optics Fund needed to maintain a balance sufficient to fund 
ongoing maintenance and operations as well as unexpected expenditures.  The 
second scenario proposed the use of $2 million in Stanford University Medical 
Center (SUMC) Development Agreement funds.  Funds in the SUMC category 
of Infrastructure and Affordable Housing were eligible for the Roth Building.  
However, $8.9 million of Infrastructure and Affordable Housing funds was 
designated for Fire Station Number 4.  Currently, community center impact 
fees were allocated to the Rinconada Park Improvements Project.  Staff was 
researching the ability to allocate park impact fees to the Rinconada Park 
Improvements Project and reallocate community center impact fees from the 
Rinconada Park Project to the Roth Building.  Third quarter financial 
information indicated departments and funds were trending as expected.  The 
May 2021 projection for a $2 million to $3.5 million surplus may increase by 
year end.  The first ARPA distribution of $6.85 million was received.   
Council Member Cormack stated she implemented the Council's instructions 
for adjusting the Budget; however, she was unable to support the Budget as 
revised. 
Council took a break at 9:06 P.M. and returned at 9:15 P.M. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
John Northway, PAHM Board Member, described the Roth Building's structural 
issues and construction costs.  The City needed to contribute funds to 
rehabilitate a City asset.   
Colleen Braff, Palo Alto Historical Association (PAHA) Board Member, shared 
her family's history in Palo Alto.  PAHA's archives needed a safe new home in 
Birge Clark's Roth Building. 
Margaret Chai Maloney, speaking on behalf of ten Palo Alto families, implored 
the Council to approve and fund the Roth Building.  Easy access to local history 
archives was important for students. 
Deborah Shepherd, speaking as an individual, advised that the County of 
Santa Clara (County) awarded three grants for work on the Roth Building.  
She encouraged the Council to support PAHM and preservation of the Roth 
Building.   
Georgie Gleim, PAHA President, indicated one climate-controlled location was 
needed to store the City's archives.  Plans for the Roth Building included 
archival space, public restrooms, and community meeting rooms.   
Kimberley Wong asked the Council to fund the Roth Building refurbishment 
project.  Learning about the history of their cultures provided children with a 
sense of belonging in the community.   
Jeremy Erman thanked the Council for restoring funding to many programs 
and hoped the Council negotiated a wage reduction with labor groups.   
Terry Holzemer hoped the Council funded the Roth Building with impact fees 
and SUMC funds. 
Amanda Brown remarked that Palo Alto was losing its iconic businesses and 
needed a history museum to preserve memories of the businesses. 
Carol Scott supported the effort to price residential parking permit fees higher 
than parking garage fees to encourage parking in garages.  She questioned 
the City selling employee parking permits for the Evergreen Park Residential 
Permit Parking Program (RPP) when garages and lots were not filled during 
the weekday noon hour.   
Karen Kwan, Palo Alto Art Center Foundation, requested the partial restoration 
of FY 2021 funding for the Palo Alto Art Center with unallocated funds and 
federal funds.   
Jonathan Erman suggested the Council consider the consequences of 
eliminating services, programs, and Staff positions. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Rich Greene, PAHM Board President, speaking for Karen Holman, Laura Bajuk, 
Nelson Ng, Hal Michelson, Doug Kreitz, stated the Roth Building was listed on 
the National Register of Historic Places and intended to provide a public 
restroom, a permanent home for City archives, access to local history, and 
meeting rooms.  PAHM invested more than $1.8 million in the project.  He 
urged the Council to approve funding for the Roth Building. 
Mayor DuBois asked about the differences among the contingency funds, their 
uses, and the reason for renaming the BSR. 
Ms. Nose explained that the Municipal Code provided for the Council 
Contingency Fund, and it was utilized for unfunded Council mandates during 
the year.  The City Manager with the Mayor's digital signature was allowed to 
allocate funds from the Council Contingency Fund to a specific project account.  
The $500,000 reserve that the Finance Committee set aside was going to be 
appropriated into a reserve fund.  A majority vote of the Council was needed 
to appropriate funds from the reserve during the fiscal year.  It was possible 
to deposit the $500,000 into the BSR, but a two-thirds vote of the Council was 
needed to appropriate funds from the BSR.   
Mayor DuBois preferred to deposit the $500,000 into the BSR without 
designating the funds for a particular purpose so that the Council was able to 
utilize the funds wherever needed.  He inquired regarding the $5.3 million that 
the Council committed to the Junior Museum and Zoo (JMZ) and the $9.3 
million mentioned in the Staff Report.   
Ms. Nose advised that the $9.3 million amount was the total of Rinconada Park 
improvements and funding for the JMZ.  The Rinconada Park Project was in 
existence prior to the JMZ commitment, and the two were combined. 
Mayor DuBois asked if the $4 million difference was the total for the Rinconada 
Park Project. 
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director, reported the total for the Rinconada 
Park Project was approximately $2 million.  Funding for the JMZ was composed 
of the initial amount, an additional $1 million, funding for exhibits, and funding 
for the temporary accommodation of the JMZ at Cubberley Community Center.   
Mayor DuBois requested the intended expenditure of the $300,000 ramp-up 
fees. 
Ms. Nose was not sure where the funds were going to be spent.  With the 
Budget cuts for FY 2021 and the Council recommending restoration of funding 
for vacant positions, there were no Staff or contractors to provide the services 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
for which the Council restored funding for FY 2022.  The funds were going to 
be spent so that Staff expeditiously ramped up to provide services.   
Council Member Cormack understood that fully funding the Roth Building 
rehabilitation was going to greatly reduce the chances of the project receiving 
federal funding.   
Ms. Nose clarified three options:  a loan from the Fiber Optics Fund that was 
repaid, a loan from the Fiber Optics Fund that was forgiven, and a grant from 
the Fiber Optics Fund.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the Council was able to indicate in the FY 
2022 Budget that it was going to provide a forgivable loan to the Roth Building 
in January 2022 so that the Council continued to advocate for grant funding.   
Ms. Nose replied yes, if the Council and PAHM entered a loan agreement and 
the Council appropriated funds in FY 2022. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether utilizing all parkland dedication 
fees eliminated the opportunity to improve Boulware Park.   
Ms. Nose did not believe so. 
Council Member Cormack indicated her fundamental concern was utilizing 
more than half of the ARPA funds.  She was not comfortable utilizing park and 
community center fees for the Roth Building because the community valued 
parks, public safety, and libraries.  She was willing to support a loan or grant 
from the Fiber Optics Fund.   
Vice Mayor Burt inquired whether Staff's forecast of a surplus was optimistic 
or confident. 
Ms. Paras clarified that Staff was confidently optimistic that the surplus was 
going to exceed $3.3 million. 
Vice Mayor Burt indicated that the Finance Committee utilized $2 million for 
the anticipated surplus when it was potentially going to exceed $3.5 million.  
The Council had a modestly higher amount to work with, even if labor groups 
did not agree to wage concessions.  There was $500,000 in the COVID-19 
Recovery Reserve and $100,000 in the Council Contingency Fund.   
Ms. Nose concurred. 
Vice Mayor Burt remarked that a COVID-19 Recovery Fund balance of 
$700,000 was reasonable.  With a greater anticipated surplus for FY 2021, the 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Council was able to restore additional funding.  He requested the incremental 
cost of opening Children's Library five days rather than three days. 
Gayathri Kanth, Interim Library Director, advised that opening seven days was 
a total of $766,000.   
Vice Mayor Burt suggested a rough estimate of the cost was $110,000 per 
day.  The Council had some funding to restore additional programs for children 
who were denied a normal childhood for the past year. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether Staff contacted Palo Alto Unified School 
District (PAUSD) Staff regarding cost sharing for certain program.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported the City/School Liaison Committee 
discussed the matter at its last meeting and recognized next steps of 
identifying programs with some overlap of interests. 
Council Member Kou requested the purpose of the line item to restore Police 
Administration programming. 
Ms. Nose indicated the purpose was travel supplies, general expenses, support 
for programs such as National Night Out, Municipal Court fees, FBI Academy, 
and additional activities. 
Council Member Kou requested an explanation of the note to recommend 
using the $125 one-time funding.  It was related to the note to eliminate 
Finance Committee. 
Ms. Nose explained that the Finance Committee set aside $145,000 to be 
allocated at a later date.  On May 17, 2021, the Council allocated funding for 
the hot dog series.  Staff offset the two amounts.   
Council Member Filseth inquired regarding the driver of the projected surplus. 
Ms. Nose related that Staff was seeing positive signs for Sales Tax due to 
improved economic activity.  Unfortunately, there was no data to support the 
positive outlook.  In addition, there were one-time savings from holding Staff 
positions vacant.   
Council Member Filseth referred to the updated Long Range Financial Forecast 
(LRFF), which indicated in FY 2023-2026 structural expenses exceeded 
structural revenues when one-time items were deducted.  The LRFF covered 
funding gaps with ARPA funding and the BSR.  In FY 2024, both resources 
were going to be depleted.  The cumulative Budget shortfall was projected at 
approximately $50 million.  Even though the City reduced expenses, expenses 
continued to grow during the recovery period.  The Green verdict was likely 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
to result in a one-time $15 million to $20 million expense followed by a 
permanent reduction in revenues of $4 million annually.  The Council had not 
yet reduced the CIP.  Part of the Finance Committee found the LRFF quite 
sobering.  Another part of the Finance Committee felt revenue projections 
were excessively conservative and revenues were going to grow much faster 
than projected.  If significant new revenue sources were not found in the next 
24 months, many of the programs funded in the FY 2022 Budget were going 
to be defunded once ARPA funds were spent.   
Council Member Stone inquired whether Staff analyzed PAHM's proposed 
funding model for the Roth Building.   
Ms. Nose reported Staff, at the Finance Committee's direction, provided PAHM 
with information to develop the proposal.   
Council Member Stone asked if Scenario B for the Roth Building resulted in 
some projects being defunded.   
Ms. Nose clarified that Scenario B identified that if community center impact 
fees were not an eligible use, Staff was going to explore defunding a project.  
PAHM believed Rinconada Park improvements were a better use of parkland 
dedication fees or park impact fees and recommended reallocation of 
community center fees from Rinconada Park improvements to the Roth 
Building.   
Council Member Stone requested the amount of uncommitted Community and 
Infrastructure funds needed to offset negative balances in other categories.   
Ms. Nose was aware of $200,000.   
Council Member Stone inquired regarding the consequences of Council 
Member Cormack's proposal to provide a loan to PAHM in January 2022. 
Mr. Green reported delaying funding to January potentially allowed the 
building permit and County grants to expire.  Construction needed to begin in 
the summer of 2021. 
Council Member Stone supported funding the Roth Building.   
Mr. Shikada indicated that Staff identified a significant body of work related 
to negotiating and drafting a construction agreement that specified the 
responsibilities of the City, PAHM, and construction contractors.   
Council Member Tanaka encouraged Council Members to remember that 
funding was limited.  Otherwise, there were going to be dramatic emergencies 
in the next few years.  If Management Staff were willing to forego salary 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
increases, labor groups may be willing to do the same.  The Council needed 
to look at and improve span of control.  He questioned whether a history 
museum was essential at the current time and whether the community valued 
a history museum more than good internet service, crossing guards, or parks.   
Vice Mayor Burt remarked that the Roth Building was competing with other 
CIP projects for funding.  In the five-year CIP, cost estimates for projects were 
less accurate in each successive year.  Projects budgeted in Years 4 and 5 did 
not have to be implemented when planned.  Over the past ten years, average 
revenue growth was higher than projected.  He requested the City's organic 
revenue growth over the previous five or ten years. 
Ms. Nose reported the Finance Committee asked Staff to provide the average 
growth in General Fund revenues over a decade.  Staff identified 5 percent 
growth that included two voter-approved increases in the Transient Occupancy 
Tax (TOT) rate.   
Ms. Paras added that average growth was 4 percent when the TOT increases 
were deducted. 
Vice Mayor Burt requested the effect of 4 percent revenue growth on the 
projected deficit. 
Ms. Paras indicated Scenario A assumed a three-year recovery and identified 
3.7 percent average growth for the next five years.   
Ms. Nose clarified that there was an ongoing funding gap in the fifth year.   
Vice Mayor Burt commented that past patterns indicated recovery was going 
to be more rapid, and the deficit was going to be less than projected.  The 
projection assumed no business tax and no increase in the Utility User's Tax 
to offset the Green verdict.  Most Council Members believed there was strong 
community support for a business tax.  A tax of $0.20 per square foot 
generated approximately $30 million annually.  He believed recovery and 
revenue sources were going to meet funding challenges.   
Council Member Kou asked Mr. Green to identify community benefits that the 
PAHM was likely to provide. 
Mr. Green reported the PAHM was going to provide community meeting rooms, 
space for community events, and a schoolroom for elementary students to 
work with local history. 
Council Member Kou asked if the Roth Building was located on parkland. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Mr. Green replied yes, even though it was not dedicated parkland.  The 
agreement between the City and the County stated the Roth Building was 
located on parkland for at least the next 20 years. 
Council Member Cormack stated Palo Alto's recovery was not going to align 
with the national recovery because Palo Alto relied on travel, especially 
international travel.  She inquired about the date on which the City was likely 
to receive revenue from a future business tax. 
Ms. Nose suggested a measure was likely to be placed on the November 2022 
ballot.  Depending on the complexity and structure of the ballot measure, 
implementing the tax required 12 to 18 months.   
Council Member Cormack recalled that the Council eliminated many vacant 
positions in FY 2021.  Future cuts had the potential to be more significant if 
the Council over-corrected at the current time.  The Green verdict contained 
some risk.  Council Members restored funding to many programs that the 
community wanted.  Some funds needed to be saved for future needs.   
Mayor DuBois requested the assumptions that Magellan made regarding use 
of the Fiber Fund and future fund revenue for the network buildout.   
Dean Batchelor, Utilities Director, advised that a decrease of approximately 
$500,000 was expected in FY 2023 due to rate changes.  The forecast was 
based on a $30 million Budget.  The funds were always going to be used.  The 
debt depended on how much the City wanted to take on. 
Mayor DuBois noted the primary Budget impact was the Legal Reserve Fund 
where transfers from Utilities were deposited rather than in the General Fund.  
The community needed to understand the importance of the transfer from 
Utilities to the General Fund.  He supported funding the Roth Building with 
impact fees, crafting a lease option, and beginning construction.  He inquired 
regarding the amount of the long-term deficit caused by the current CIP. 
Ms. Nose related that the amount was dependent on how the Council 
prioritized projects.  The five-year forecast assumed a return to the base level 
of catch-up/keep-up funding for the CIP.  In FY 2022, the base transfer was 
approximately $2.5 million, which increased to approximately $17 million in 
FY 2026.  The five-year CIP before the Council assumed that five-year ramp-
up.  If the Council chose to reduce ramp-up funding in future years, there 
were going to be impacts to the five-year CIP.   
Mayor DuBois did not want to choose the most optimistic scenario across the 
board.  He was not comfortable with restoring additional funding.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to: 
A. 
Direct Staff to return on June 21, 2021 for adoption of the Fiscal Year 
2022 Proposed Operating and Capital Budgets and Municipal Fee 
Schedule in alignment with the work completed by the Committee and 
Council during the month of May 2021 and provide direction on any final 
adjustments in preparation for City Council Adoption; 
B. 
Review and accept final FY 2022-2025 Capital Improvement Plan as 
amended by the actions outlined in this report (as recommended by the 
Finance Committee and Council);  
C. 
Review and accept the alternative balancing strategy in the event the 
City does not reach agreement with labor groups on concessions in the 
General Fund, that the City Council utilize current unallocated funds of 
$1.7 million in the General Fund to offset the additional expense or be 
placed in the Budget Stabilization Reserve if remain unallocated; and  
D. 
Recommend Option B.ii. for funding of the ROTH building rehabilitation 
project as outlined by the Finance Committee on May 25, 2021. 
Vice Mayor Burt requested a potential timeframe for the Council to review 
financial information for the first quarter of FY 2022. 
Ms. Nose replied the end of October 2021. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER “Direct Staff to return by the end of October 2021 
with preliminary Q1 financial results so the Council can consider budget 
amendments.” (New Part E). 
Council Member Stone inquired whether the Council was going to review the 
CIP and alternative balancing strategy again on June 21, 2021. 
Ms. Nose answered no. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the beginning of Motion, Parts A, B and 
C, “Direct Staff to return on June 21, 2021 … .” 
Council Member Cormack requested the consequences of selecting Option B 
in Part D of the Motion. 
Ms. Nose reported Staff was going to allocate $2 million of SUMC funds, utilize 
$350,000 of impact fees, and look at use of community center fees as the first 
order of finding available funding for the Roth Building.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Council Member Cormack remarked that reallocating fees to the Roth Building 
may result in projects for Fire Station Number 4 and Rinconada Park being 
defunded.   
Ms. Nose related that Staff was going to present options for the Council's 
consideration. 
Council Member Kou asked if Staff proposed returning to Stanford University 
to clarify use of SUMC funds if funds were not found for the Roth Building. 
Ms. Nose answered yes, if the Council wished to renegotiate the terms of the 
Development Agreement with Stanford University. 
Council Member Kou asked how quickly Staff was able to work with Stanford 
University. 
Ms. Nose indicated Staff was not able to accomplish that prior to June 21, 
2021. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kou to: 
A. 
Direct Staff to return on June 21, 2021 for adoption of the Fiscal Year 
2022 Proposed Operating and Capital Budgets and Municipal Fee 
Schedule in alignment with the work completed by the Committee and 
Council during the month of May 2021 and provide direction on any final 
adjustments in preparation for City Council Adoption;  
B. 
Direct Staff to return on June 21, 2021 to accept final FY 2022-2025 
Capital Improvement Plan as amended by the actions outlined in this 
report (as recommended by the Finance Committee and Council);  
C. 
Direct Staff to return on June 21, 2021 to accept the alternative 
balancing strategy in the event the City does not reach agreement with 
labor groups on concessions in the General Fund, that the City Council 
utilize current unallocated funds of $1.7 million in the General Fund to 
offset the additional expense or be placed in the Budget Stabilization 
Reserve if remain unallocated;  
D. 
Recommend Option B.ii. for funding of the ROTH building rehabilitation 
project as outlined by the Finance Committee on May 25, 2021; and 
E. 
Direct Staff to return by the end of October 2021 with preliminary Q1 
financial results so that the Council can consider budget amendments.   
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  4-3 Cormack, Filseth, Tanaka no 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 28 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/07/2021 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack invited Council Members to participate in the 
Summit for Women and Girls.  She requested the status of the Safe Gun 
Storage Ordinance.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that Staff was probably going to present 
it to the Council after the summer break.   
Mayor DuBois encouraged everyone to attend World Music Month.  He thanked 
Council Member Kou for investing a tremendous amount of time in airplane 
noise issues. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:14 P.M. 
  
