CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 18 
Special Meeting 
May 10, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Vice Mayor Burt advised that Agenda Item Number 1 was going to be heard 
after Agenda Item Number 7. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, noted an at-places memorandum regarding Agenda 
Item Number 5 clarified the use of a portion of funding. 
Oral Communications 
Rebecca Ward asked the Council to agendize a discussion of a strategy to deal 
with jet traffic.  The priority strategy, membership in the Santa Clara/ Santa 
Cruz Roundtable, was suspended.  The City was not powerless, but it was 
meek and ineffective in its approach to dealing with aircraft traffic. 
Shani Kleinhaus, Santa Clara Valley Audubon Society, advised that the diesel 
spill into Matadero Creek affected birds at the height of the nesting season.  
She requested the City participate in the investigation of the spill, require 
monitoring of remediation, and ensure the offending party was fined.   
Weijia Cheng shared his observation of Police Officers and a terrified Chinese 
woman interacting on the street.  He questioned the presence of the K-9 unit 
and the lack of a Chinese-speaking officer.   
Jeremy Erman expressed dismay about the funding cuts for arts and education 
programming.  He urged Staff to provide the full proposed budget to the 
Council and public so that they understood the costs of programs.  The Finance 
Committee and Council did not schedule sufficient time to discuss the 
proposed budget.   
Rebecca Eisenberg remarked that proposed budget cuts eliminated programs 
that attracted families to Palo Alto and any chance to mitigate climate change.  
The Council was heading in the wrong direction. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
Douglas Moran urged the City to ensure government agencies were aware of 
the complex geology of Matadero Creek before the agencies attempted to 
remediate the recent fuel spill. 
Hamilton Hitchings proposed the Council utilize the majority of federal 
stimulus funding during the first year and contingency funding in the second 
year and continue salary and hiring freezes to reduce the Budget deficit.  
Perhaps, the Utilities Department needed to be charged for internal services 
to help make up the transfers from Enterprise Funds to the General Fund.   
Winter Dellenbach commented that an unknown amount of diesel fuel was 
spilled into Matadero Creek, which was a wildlife habitat.  The fuel escaped 
containment and was found 500 yards downstream of the containment booms.  
She inquired regarding efforts to prevent the public and pets from accessing 
the creek and impacts on the creek's ecosystem.  The public, Council, Staff, 
and Parks and Recreation Commission needed regular updates on the 
situation.   
Becky Sanders asked the Council to reconsider its tentative approval of 
rezoning the property at 2951 El Camino Real.  The Council did not treat the 
Ventura neighborhood equitably.   
Jonathan Erman opposed budget cuts that affected costumes and staffing for 
the Children's Theatre.  In some instances, volunteers were appropriate 
replacements for outside contractors.   
Minutes Approval 
2. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the April 19, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Burt to approve the 
Action Minutes for the April 19, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 7. 
Rebecca Eisenberg, addressing Agenda Item Numbers 3 and 5, expressed 
disappointment with the City utilizing a contract auditor.  Other cities were 
using Citizens Options for Public Safety (COPS) funding to improve body-worn 
camera programs and to provide radio communications to the public.   
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Stone to approve Agenda Item Numbers 3-7. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
3. 
Finance Committee Recommends the City Council Approve the Macias 
Gini & O’Connell’s Single Audit Report for the Year Ended June 30, 2020. 
4. 
Policy and Services Committee Recommends the City Council Accept the 
City Auditor’s Quarterly Status Report (Q3 of Fiscal Year 2021), and 
Approve Additional Task Orders for Approved Audit Activities. 
5. 
Approval of the Acceptance and Appropriation of State of California 
Citizens Options for Public Safety (COPS) Funds; and Approval of a 
Budget Amendment (Requires 2/3 Approval) in the Supplemental Law 
Enforcement Services Fund. 
6. 
Parks and Recreation Commission and Staff Recommend the City 
Council: 1) Adopt an Ordinance Amending the Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 
Municipal Fee Schedule to Include Foothills Nature Preserve Daily 
Vehicle Entrance Fees Based on Passenger Capacity and Free Vehicle 
Entrance for Certain Students and on Certain Days; 2) Prohibit the use 
of Certain Entrances to Foothills by Horse and Bicycle Users; and 3) 
Direct Staff to Permanently Remove Nine Hillside Barbecues at Foothills 
to Improve Fire Safety. 
7. 
Resolution 9954 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto to Extend the Temporary Closures of Portions of California Avenue, 
University Avenue, and Certain Downtown Streets Intersecting 
University Avenue; and Extending the Pilot Parklet Program as First 
Authorized by Resolution Number 9099.” 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 3-6:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 7:  6-1 Tanaka no 
Council Member Tanaka felt metrics were essential to measure the program's 
impact on businesses.   
Special Orders of the Day 
1. 
Appointment of Candidates to the Human Relations Commission, Public 
Art Commission, Stormwater Management Oversight Committee, and 
the Utilities Advisory Commission. 
[While Council Members voted, the Council heard City Manager Comments 
and returned to this item.] 
First Round of voting for three positions on the Human Relations Commission 
with terms ending May 31, 2024.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
Voting For: 
Sunita de Tourreil (Incumbent) 
Cormack, Tanaka, Kou 
Adriana Eberle 
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Stone, 
Tanaka, Kou 
Michelle Kraus 
Burt, DuBois, Filseth, Stone 
Kaloma Smith (Incumbent) 
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Stone, 
Tanaka, Kou 
Beth Minor, City Clerk, announced that Adriana Eberle with seven votes, 
Kaloma Smith with seven votes, and Michelle Kraus with four votes were 
appointed to the Human Relations Commission. 
First Round of voting for three positions on the Public Art Commission with 
terms ending May 31, 2024.  
Voting For: 
Shiraaz Bhabha 
Cormack, Tanaka 
Loren Gordon (Incumbent) 
Burt, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Mette Huberman 
 
Emily Meyer 
Cormack 
Ben Miyaji (Incumbent) 
Burt, Stone, Tanaka 
Cleia Muggler 
DuBois, Filseth, Kou 
Harriet Stern 
 
Lisa Waltuch 
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, 
Stone 
Mark Weiss 
 
Ms. Minor announced that Loren Gordon with six votes, and Lisa Waltuch with 
six votes were appointed to the Public Art Commission. 
Second Round of voting for one position on the Public Art Commission with 
terms ending May 31, 2024.  
Voting For: 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
Shiraaz Bhabha 
 
Mette Huberman 
 
Emily Meyer 
 
Ben Miyaji (Incumbent) 
Cormack, Burt, Stone, Tanaka 
Cleia Muggler 
DuBois, Filseth, Kou 
Harriet Stern 
 
 
Mark Weiss 
 
Ms. Minor announced that Ben Miyaji with four votes was appointed to the 
Public Art Commission. 
First Round of voting for four positions on the Storm Water Management 
Oversight Committee with terms ending May 31, 2025.  
Voting For: 
Stephanie MacDonald 
Cormack, Stone, Tanaka 
Hal Mickelson (Incumbent) 
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, 
Stone, Tanaka 
Dena Mossar (Incumbent) 
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, 
Stone 
Catherine Perman 
Burt, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Tanaka 
Bob Wenzlau (Incumbent)  
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, 
Stone, Tanaka 
Ms. Minor announced that Hal Mickelson with seven votes, Bob Wenzlau with 
seven votes, Dena Mossar with six votes, and Catherine Perman with five 
votes were appointed to the Storm Water Management Oversight Committee. 
First Round of voting for two positions on the Utilities Advisory Commission 
with a term ending May 31, 2024.  
Voting For: 
John Bowie 
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, 
Stone, Tanaka 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
Carol Guthrie 
Cormack, Tanaka 
Don Jackson (Incumbent) 
DuBois, Filseth, Kou 
Phil Metz 
Burt, Stone 
Rajmohan Rajagopalan 
 
Ms. Minor announced that John Bowie with seven votes was appointed to the 
Utilities Advisory Commission. 
Second Round of voting for one position on the Utilities Advisory Commission 
with a term ending May 31, 2024.  
Voting For: 
Carol Guthrie 
Tanaka 
Don Jackson (Incumbent) 
DuBois, Filseth, Kou 
Phil Metz 
Burt, Cormack, Stone 
Rajmohan Rajagopalan 
 
Ms. Minor announced that a third round of voting was needed for the Utilities 
Advisory Commission. 
Third Round of voting for one position on the Utilities Advisory Commission 
with a term ending May 31, 2024.  
Voting For: 
Carol Guthrie 
 
Don Jackson (Incumbent) 
DuBois, Filseth, Kou 
Phil Metz 
Burt, Cormack, Stone, Tanaka 
Rajmohan Rajagopalan 
 
Ms. Minor announced that Phil Metz with four votes was appointed to the 
Utilities Advisory Commission. 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported COVID-19 vaccinations continued to be 
important.  COVID-19 testing was available on Tuesdays and Wednesdays and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
on May 21, 2021.  Opportunities for public comment regarding the Proposed 
Budget were available online and at Finance Committee hearings and Council 
discussions.  On May 6, 2021, the Fire Department responded to the Veterans 
Administration (VA) Hospital's call regarding an oil spill.  A third-party 
contractor to the VA was leading the cleanup effort.  The Fire Department, 
Public Works Department, and several agencies were involved in the situation.  
The City Manager's Office contacted Congresswoman Eshoo's Office and 
Assembly Member Berman's Office to request assistance with following up with 
State and Federal agencies.  The Utilities Department received reports of scam 
callers pretending to be Utilities Department Staff.  May was Affordable 
Housing Month, National Police Week was May 9-15, 2021, and National Police 
Officers Memorial Day was May 15, 2021.  Race and equity events were 
scheduled throughout May 2021.  Upcoming Council items were a report from 
the Finance Committee, a Study Session regarding the National Community 
Survey, land use proposals, an appeal of the Regional Housing Needs 
Allocation (RHNA), a Fiber to the Home (FTTH) update, and a contract with 
GreenWaste.   
Action Items 
8. 
Joint City Council/Planning and Transportation Commission Meeting, 
Followed by Council Action to Kick Off the Housing Element Update; and 
Provide City Council Endorsement of the City's Approach to Fulfill State 
Housing Element Certification Requirements and Approval. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, advised that the 
meeting was intended to launch efforts to prepare a Housing Element.  Many 
challenging policy issues needed to be addressed, but there were future 
opportunities for input on the issues. 
Tim Wong, Senior Planner, introduced himself as the project manager for the 
Housing Element Update.  The Housing Element Working Group (Working 
Group) held its first meeting the prior week, and a community meeting was 
scheduled for May 15, 2021.  Information about the Housing Element Update 
was available at paloaltohousingelement.com.   
Della Acosta, Rincon Consultants, reported the Housing Element was a 
mandatory element of the Palo Alto Comprehensive Plan and was required to 
be updated every eight years and certified by the California Department of 
Housing and Community Development (HCD).  The deadline to submit the 
Housing Element for certification was January 31, 2023.  The Housing Element 
was composed of a community profile, housing constraints, housing 
resources, and a community plan.  Objectives for the Housing Element were 
to provide housing to all sectors, to provide affordable housing for those who 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
needed it most, to streamline affordable housing permitting, and to ensure 
equal housing opportunities.  Failing to achieve certification resulted in a four-
year update cycle, monetary fines, the Comprehensive Plan being deemed 
inadequate and invalid, and ineligibility for grant and funding programs.  The 
Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) addressed future housing needs 
caused by population, employment, and housing growth.  The planning period 
or sixth cycle for the Housing Element was January 2023 to January 2031.  
HCD determined the housing allocation for the Association of Bay Area 
Governments (ABAG), and ABAG distributed housing units across jurisdictions 
within its region.  Each jurisdiction prepared a Housing Element that provided 
future development of the allocation.  Very-low-income housing was 
affordable for persons earning 31 percent to 50 percent of Area Median 
Income (AMI).  Low-income housing was affordable for persons earning 51 
percent to 80 percent of AMI.  Moderate-income housing was affordable for 
persons earning 81 percent to 120 percent of AMI.  Above-moderate-income 
housing was affordable for persons earning more than 120 percent of AMI.  
Palo Alto's RHNA allocation for the sixth cycle was 6,086 total units or 1,556 
very-low-income units, 896 low-income units, 1,013 moderate-income units, 
and 2,621 above-moderate-income units.  The first step to meeting the RHNA 
allocation was a sites inventory or analysis.  Recent housing legislation 
increased the complexity of developing a Housing Element.  A wide variety of 
community engagement was planned for 2021 and 2022.  Site selection was 
scheduled for Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) review in 
January 2022 and Council review in March 2022.  PTC review of housing 
programs was scheduled for April 2022 with Council review in early May 2022.  
A draft of the Housing Element was scheduled for release to the public in late 
May 2022.  Staff planned to submit the draft Housing Element for HCD's initial 
review in June 2022.  The PTC was going to review the final Housing Element 
in September 2022 with Council adoption scheduled for November 2022.   
[The Council returned to Agenda Item Number 1 to receive the results of the 
first round of voting.] 
Kathy Jordan highlighted the effects of population declines in California and 
Santa Clara County in 2020 and the number of small businesses remaining 
closed compared to those operating in January 2020.  The State had a $75 
billion surplus. 
Jeremy Erman questioned the need for a lengthier discussion of the Housing 
Element Update than the Proposed Budget and the need for consultant 
services at this time.   
Jeffrey Hook asked if climate change was a factor in the RHNA calculation and 
if rezoning commercial parcels to residential reduced the City's RHNA 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
allocation.  The timeframe for planning needed to be 60 to 100 years because 
the lifespan of housing was 60 to 100 years.   
Rebecca Eisenberg felt the Council needed to understand that housing helped 
the environment.  Infill housing removed cars from the street and reduced 
pollution and water usage.  The height limit for housing was a big problem.   
Kelsey Banes commented that infill housing impacted climate change more 
than anything else.  The process for the Housing Element Update and site 
identification needed to be inclusive.   
Salim Damergji believed the City needed to focus on its role in affirmatively 
furthering fair housing.  The Working Group did not represent all economic 
segments of the community.   
Jordan Grimes, Peninsula for Everyone, remarked that populations did not 
grow without housing.  No credible group posed questions about the accuracy 
of the RHNA numbers.   
Arthur Keller noted that the City had to build low-income housing. 
Council took a break at 6:30 P.M. and returned at 6:40 P.M. 
Mayor DuBois noted the discussion concerned the process and the schedule 
for the Housing Element Update.   
Doria Summa, Planning and Transportation Commissioner, asked if 
deficiencies in the draft Housing Element were going to be corrected between 
June 2022 and January 2023. 
Ms. Acosta related that HCD was going to review the draft Housing Element 
and provide Staff with comments.  Staff and the consultants were going to 
address the comments and submit a corrected Housing Element for PTC and 
Council review. 
Breanna Weatherby, Rincon Consultants, added that HCD had 60 days to 
review the draft Housing Element, provide notice of any deficiencies, and 
request inclusion of additional information.  HCD and Staff were likely to 
communicate regarding the notice before the draft was revised and a final 
Housing Element was presented to the PTC for review and Council for 
approval.   
Ms. Summa asked if revisions to the final Housing Element were allowed after 
January 31, 2023. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
Ms. Weatherby explained that revisions typically were not made once the 
Council adopted the final Housing Element and it was submitted for 
certification.  HCD was allowed to request a minor revision to text.   
Veronica Tam, Rincon Consultants, added that there was a grace period from 
the statutory deadline if the City was eligible for it.  Consequences were more 
significant if the deadline was missed.   
Ed Lauing, Planning and Transportation Commissioner, noted the Work 
Group's concern that the end of the timeline was quite compressed.  As the 
process evolved, the timeline needed to be reviewed.  Perhaps, the beginning 
of the process needed to advance more quickly. 
Mr. Lait related that Staff focused on touchpoints with the PTC and Council.  
Staff intended to guide the Working Group, the Council Ad Hoc Committee, 
PTC, and Council altogether through the process.   
Michael Alcheck, Planning and Transportation Commissioner, remarked that 
the preparation of the Housing Element was going to be far more complex and 
involved than prior ones.  A Working Group with diverse membership was 
going to significantly improve community acceptance of the final Housing 
Element.  Because of the number of new legal requirements and the 
magnitude of the City's RHNA allocation, planning professionals needed to 
develop an outline for the Housing Element prior to involving the Working 
Group to help focus the Working Group's efforts.  A limited number of paths 
were available for achieving certification of the Housing Element.  Planning 
Staff and the City Attorney's Office needed to do some of the heavy lifting 
with the Housing Element.   
Bart Hechtman, Planning and Transportation Commission Chair, liked the 
organization outlined in the Staff Report, and the reasonable schedule.  The 
Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for the 2017 Comprehensive Plan probably 
addressed the then-current RHNA allocation of approximately 2,000 units.  
The draft Housing Element needed to analyze the new RHNA numbers.  
Environmental review was scheduled to begin after completion of site selection 
in March 2022 and to be complete in November 2022.  Staff anticipated 
preparing a Supplemental EIR, for which they scheduled sufficient time.  If a 
Subsequent EIR was required, more time was going to be needed.   
Mr. Lait agreed to review the timeline for the EIR process.  The Comprehensive 
Plan EIR studied a housing increase of approximately 4,500 units, which was 
closer to 6,000 units.  Rincon Consultants was going to prepare the 
Supplemental EIR. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
[The Council returned to Agenda Item Number 1 to hear the results of the 
second round of voting.] 
Council Member Cormack asked if the Working Group was going to be trained 
as other Boards and Commissions were. 
Mr. Lait advised that the Working Group received training regarding the Brown 
Act, but Staff agreed to underscore the need to identify themselves. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the Council Ad Hoc Committee was going 
to meet with the Working Group during regular public meetings or if Working 
Group leaders were going to meet with the Ad Hoc Committee.   
Mr. Wong explained that Staff was going to present the Working Group's work 
product to the Ad Hoc Committee, and the Working Group's co-chairs were 
welcome to join Ad Hoc Committee meetings.  Staff was going to report any 
direction from the Ad Hoc Committee to the Working Group. 
Bryna Chang, Planning and Transportation Commissioner, commented that 
the content needed to address constraints and hoped a significant amount of 
time was scheduled for discussing constraints and funding for affordable 
housing.   
Cari Templeton, Planning and Transportation Commissioner, inquired 
regarding a requirement for new housing to be distributed across the City  
Ms. Weatherby advised that HCD was going to ensure housing was spread 
across the community and housing for one income level was not located in 
one particular area, especially with the affirmatively furthering fair housing 
requirement.   
Ms. Templeton asked if equitable distribution was defined as some affordable 
housing located in every neighborhood, ZIP Code, or something else. 
Ms. Weatherby explained that several things played into equitable distribution, 
such as existing development and the location of suitable sites.  There were 
no specific rules for equitable distribution.  HCD was going to consider the City 
as a whole when reviewing the distribution of sites. 
Mr. Lait added that the Housing Element was going to respond to the technical 
requirement set forth in State law, but policy considerations were going to be 
presented to the Working Group, the PTC, and Council.   
Ms. Templeton recalled discussions of the North Ventura Coordinated Area 
Plan (NVCAP) hitting many roadblocks and inquired whether lessons learned 
from the NVCAP were going to be applied to the Housing Element process. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
Mr. Lait advised that Rachel Tanner resolved many of the NVCAP issues and 
participated in developing the timeline and process for the Housing Element 
Update.   
Giselle Roohparvar, Planning and Transportation Commissioner, asked how an 
appeal of the City's RHNA allocation and the grace period affected the timeline 
for the Housing Element Update and whether the City appealed the RHNA 
allocation to ABAG or provided commentary to ABAG who appealed the 
allocation to HCD. 
Mr. Lait indicated the appeal was scheduled for a Council discussion on May 
18, 2021.  Staff and the consultants were going to proceed with the Housing 
Element Update using the current RHNA allocation because the results of an 
appeal were not going to be known for some time.   
Mr. Wong explained that ABAG, not HCD, was going to decide any appeals. 
Mayor DuBois requested the names of other jurisdictions that Rincon was 
representing. 
Ms. Weatherby related that Rincon was working with approximately 26 
jurisdictions throughout the state but primarily jurisdictions located in the 
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) region and San Diego 
County.   
Mayor DuBois inquired whether any of the cities were similar to the City of 
Palo Alto in land costs and other characteristics. 
Ms. Weatherby reported the City of Carlsbad and its Housing Element process 
and demographics were similar to Palo Alto.   
Mayor DuBois requested Staff's vision for choosing sites prior to a policy 
discussion. 
Mr. Lait commented that input from the Working Group, Ad Hoc Committee, 
PTC, and Council was going to guide Staff in drafting an initial list of sites that 
met objectives.  As policies formed, the list could be modified.  The site 
selection needed to be drafted first because it was subject to environmental 
review.   
Mr. Wong added that frequent conversations with the Ad Hoc Committee and 
the PTC were likely to help refine the list of sites and raise policy issues. 
Mayor DuBois inquired about a process for cities in Santa Clara County to 
exchange allocations. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
Mr. Lait was not aware of any recent discussion of such a process, and it did 
not appear to be viable at the current time. 
Mayor DuBois asked if there was a process for exchanging allocations or if 
jurisdictions simply agreed to exchange allocations. 
Mr. Lait did not believe there was a formal process.  When the City appealed 
its RHNA allocation in the past, it negotiated the allocation during the appeal 
process.   
Mr. Wong added that the exchange process was no longer viable because of 
legal changes. 
Mayor DuBois wanted to pursue multiple paths if there was an opportunity to 
do so.  Demonstrating the potential for development was likely to drive the 
distribution of sites.  Sites in single-family neighborhoods were probably not 
viable since the potential for redevelopment was negligible.  
Mr. Lait reported Staff utilized a tiered approach to focus on projects that came 
online during the upcoming cycle and sites supported by the existing 
Comprehensive Plan.  If those sites did not provide sufficient housing units, 
Staff was going to approach the Working Group and Ad Hoc Committee with 
a conversation. 
Mayor DuBois challenged Commissioners and Council Members to think 
outside the box and consider expanding housing into areas such as Stanford 
Research Park and Stanford Mall and annexing areas outside Palo Alto. 
Council Member Stone concurred with previous comments regarding the 
timeline and NVCAP.   
Vice Mayor Burt requested clarification of eligibility for the grace period. 
Mr. Lait did not believe the grace period was intended for policy discussions. 
Ms. Weatherby advised that the grace period was intended for jurisdictions 
making meaningful efforts to complete their Housing Elements.  To be eligible 
for a grace period, HCD's initial review needed to be complete, and a 
jurisdiction had to demonstrate progress toward completing its Housing 
Element.   
Vice Mayor Burt was not interested in including the grace period in the Housing 
Element Update process but in having time to revise the final Housing Element 
if HCD did not certify it.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
Mr. Lait reported the Rincon team had extensive experience in preparing 
Housing Elements and extensive working relationships with HCD.  Once the 
Housing Element was drafted, staff and the consultants were going to consult 
with HCD to ensure the Housing Element aligned with HCD guidelines.   
Mr. Wong added that discussions with HCD were going to include policy 
parameters acceptable to HCD so that the Council was able to make informed 
decisions.   
Vice Mayor Burt noted that one approach to defining the missing middle was 
income levels, and the City had the greatest difficulty in achieving housing 
units for the missing middle because of extremely high land values.  Subsidies 
may be needed to provide housing for the missing middle.  He inquired 
whether Assembly Bill (AB) 725 was intended to define missing middle housing 
as moderate in density and scale. 
Mr. Lait related that missing middle housing was a topic that the Working 
Group and the Ad Hoc Committee was going to help Staff navigate so that 
housing complied with State requirements and City needs.   
Ms. Weatherby reported according to AB 725, jurisdictions adopting Housing 
Elements on or after January 1, 2022 needed to fulfill 25 percent of their 
moderate-income and above-moderate-income RHNA allocations with 
developments of multifamily housing of four-plus units but not on sites that 
accommodated four-plus units of single-family homes or duplexes.   
Vice Mayor Burt stated the City was able to zone for and achieve construction 
of those units, but the market was not going to price the units for those income 
levels. 
Rachel Tanner, Planning and Development Services Assistant Director, 
concurred that AB 725 addressed the type and design of housing.  Missing 
middle also referred to a mid-rise scale and an income level.  A duplex or 
small-scale apartment building was not necessarily affordable for middle-
income groups.  Staff planned to explore financing opportunities for missing 
middle housing. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked how accessory dwelling units (ADU) were going to be 
treated under the Housing Element Update. 
Ms. Weatherby explained that HCD was looking for trends in ADU 
development.  In the SCAG region, HCD allowed jurisdictions to base their 
ADU projection on the number of permits approved in 2020. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt inquired regarding HCD's handling of jurisdictions that did not 
have a trends for ADU production. 
Ms. Weatherby advised that the City was allowed to project a greater number 
of ADUs than trends justified if it supported the projection with policies and 
programs that included monitoring, timeframes, objectives, and action items 
should projections not be realized after the second year of the cycle. 
Council Member Kou asked if the City was allowed to utilize AB 686 and the 
Fair Housing Act to require low-income housing units to be comparable to 
other units in a development and to accommodate families. 
Ms. Weatherby related that a requirement for comparable housing units was 
going to be a City policy.   
Ms. Tanner reported the City currently required below-market-rate (BMR) 
units in a market-rate building to be comparable in quality.  One way to 
address BMR units for families was through the bedroom mix of a 
development.   
Mr. Wong added that Staff worked with developers to choose the proposed 
units.  The only allowed difference between market-rate and BMR units was 
finishes.   
Council Member Kou inquired whether Senate Bill (SB) 166 addressed no net 
loss in rents for affordable units. 
Mr. Lait replied no.  SB 166 addressed a unit-for-unit replacement. 
Mr. Wong explained that the no net loss provision was going to require the 
City to provide a small surplus of units. 
Council Member Kou asked if contaminated sites were allowed to be selected 
for the Housing Element. 
Mr. Lait did not believe contaminated sites were excluded from selection based 
on permitted redevelopment of sites located in the existing plume. 
Ms. Weatherby clarified that some contaminated sites were too expensive to 
redevelop because of the required mitigation measures.  That was addressed 
in the environmental analysis rather than the Housing Element. 
Council Member Kou inquired about a planning collaborative. 
Mr. Lait indicated the City was a member of the planning collaborative where 
members shared information and resources. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
Commissioner Alcheck suggested Staff and the consultants provide the PTC 
and Council with information about the tools that other jurisdictions utilized to 
demonstrate the likelihood of a site being redeveloped and about HCD's 
acceptance or rejection of sites.   
Mayor DuBois closed the joint session with the PTC. 
[The Council returned to Agenda Item Number 1 to receive the results of the 
third and final round of voting.] 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if mandates incentivized cities to provide extremely 
small units without a demographic balance for new units. 
Mr. Lait did not believe that was the stated intent of mandates.  The State was 
attempting to advance a number of policy objectives.  The City needed to 
advance its own interests and demographics by providing a mix of housing 
types. 
Mr. Wong commented that policies and programs encouraging that type of 
housing was not likely to obtain HCD approval. 
Vice Mayor Burt stated providing a demographic balance conflicted with 
meeting the numerical demand for housing. 
Mr. Lait interpreted Vice Mayor Burt's comments as highlighting the conflict 
between State law and local jurisdiction needs to produce housing numbers, 
which were extraordinarily high. 
Council Member Stone asked if there was any legislation to fund the 
production of low-income housing. 
Mr. Lait indicated many of the bills noted no funding was associated with them 
or there was no need to reimburse the local jurisdiction. 
Ms. Tanner advised that the State Housing Bond and the Governor's proposed 
budget provided funding for housing.  The County of Santa Clara (County) 
also passed measures to provide funding for housing projects.   
Council Member Stone requested Staff's priority for seeking funding 
opportunities and government grants. 
Ms. Tanner related that most funding was project-specific. 
Council Member Stone appreciated social justice requirements for the Housing 
Element.  Legislation typically mandated the construction of market-rate 
housing and penalized jurisdictions for not doing so.  The City needed to 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
advocate for affordable housing funding with State elected officials and to 
adopt policies targeting construction of affordable housing.   
Council Member Filseth noted the complexity of housing legislation and the 
possibility of additional housing legislation in the future.  Two challenges the 
City needed to resolve in order to submit a compliant Housing Element were 
affordable housing whether through an Inclusionary Ordinance or subsidies 
and large mixed-use projects that provided significant housing and created 
even more housing demand.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether the Working Group was expected 
to address funding for affordable housing. 
Mr. Lait answered no.   
Mayor DuBois proposed the Council pursue paths of drafting the Housing 
Element Update, advocating for a more balanced approach, exploring a trade 
of allocations, and investigating and preserving legal protections.  He 
suggested the Council consider an anti-displacement policy and a 
neighborhood in Stanford Research Park with schools and services.  Mandates 
were potentially going to freeze housing in the short term.  The City may be 
forced to consider zoning open space for housing.  He inquired whether HCD 
was likely to accept sites converted from short-term rentals to longer-term 
housing stock through a new Airbnb Ordinance.   
Mr. Wong agreed to explore the concept, but he was unsure how tenure played 
into RHNA credit versus production. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth to 
accept the overall project schedule and approach, as well as the roles and 
responsibilities of the Housing Element Working Group, Council Ad Hoc 
Committee and Planning and Transportation Commission, as detailed in this 
report, with an attempt to spread the workload as evenly as possible over the 
schedule.  
Vice Mayor Burt suggested adding a Council check-in to the timeline if 
significant zoning changes were needed to create housing sites.   
Mr. Lait indicated the Ad Hoc Committee was able to direct Staff to schedule 
a check-in with the Council.  Staff intended to present any major policy shift 
or new policy to the Council.   
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/10/2021 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Kou requested the City Manager report to the Council 
regarding the incident in Ventura mentioned in public comment. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, agreed to provide a report and to respect the 
privacy of any individuals involved in the incident. 
Mayor DuBois recognized Peace Officers Memorial Day. 
Closed Session 
9. 
Conference With the City’s Cybersecurity Operations Managers       (City 
Manager and IT Operations Management Staff) – Regarding Current 
Cyberthreat Environment and City Cybersecurity Programs Authority: 
Government Code Section 54957(a). 
Rebecca Eisenberg commented that an overabundance of security worsened 
environmental damage caused by the diesel spill and reiterated Ms. 
Dellenbach's comments.  She urged the Council not to fund any further 
encryption of Police Department communications.   
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to 
go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 8:18 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 10:00 P.M. 
Mayor DuBois announced no reportable action.  
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:00 P.M. in honor of Peace 
Officer’s Memorial Day on Saturday, May 15th.  
 
NOTE: Action minutes are prepared in accordance with Palo Alto Municipal 
Code (PAMC) 2.04.160(a) and (b). Summary minutes (sense) are prepared in 
accordance with PAMC Section 2.04.160(c). Beginning in January 2018, in 
accordance with Ordinance No. 5423, the City Council found action minutes 
and the video/audio recordings of Council proceedings to be the official records 
of both Council and committee proceedings. These recordings are available on 
the City’s website. 
