CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 28 
Special Meeting 
March 15, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY  
Subject: Written Liability Claim Against the City of Palo Alto  
By Joel Domingo Alejo (Claim No. C20-0037)  
Authority: Government Code Section 54956.9(e)(3). 
Aram James asked the Council to view the video of the attack and offered an 
instruction if there was no video. 
Rebecca Eisenberg summarized the attack on Mr. Alejo and urged the 
Council to take control of the Police Department. 
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:06 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:46 P.M. 
Mayor DuBois announced no reportable action. 
Special Orders of the Day 
2. 
Presentation by the Palo Alto Players and Proclamation. 
Elizabeth Santana, Palo Alto Players Managing Director, reported the 2021 
season is the 90th anniversary of the Palo Alto Players.  As the longest-
running theatre company on the Peninsula, the Palo Alto Players served the 
community through theatrical performances, community outreach, volunteer 
opportunities, and employment for local artists, designers, and stage 
technicians.  Thanks to Lucie Stern, the Palo Alto Players obtained a 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
permanent home, now known as the Lucie Stern Community Theatre.  Ms. 
Santana shared a video montage of recent productions.  The Palo Alto 
Players embraced the spirit of innovation to provide the community with a 
virtual production and events in 2020.   
Greer Stone read the Proclamation into the record.  
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor DuBois proposed continuing Agenda Item Number 6A, which was 
continued from March 8, 2021, to allow sufficient time for deliberation on the 
Castilleja School project. 
Vice Mayor Burt expressed concerns about the length of meetings, the 
postponement of Agenda Items, and exclusion of the community from 
Council Member meetings.  He supported continuing Agenda Item Number 
6A. 
Council Member Cormack preferred to follow the published Agenda and 
continue Agenda Item Number 6A if the Council was not able to conclude its 
deliberations this evening. 
Council Member Stone concurred with allowing more time for Agenda Item 
Number 7 and suggested continuing either Agenda Item 6A or 8. 
Mayor DuBois noted the Council previously heard public comment for Agenda 
Item Number 7 and inquired whether there was an issue with beginning 
discussion of it prior to the time stated on the Agenda. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that it was not a legal issue, but a policy 
question for the Council. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Burt to continue 
Agenda 
Item 
Number 
6A, 
“PUBLIC 
HEARING: 
Finance 
Committee 
Recommends the City Council Approve the Park, Community, and Library 
Development Impact Fee Justification Study …” to a date uncertain.  
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Cormack no 
Oral Communications 
Aram James appreciated LaDoris Cordell's comments regarding the 
Independent Police Auditor's (IPA) report and hoped the Council invited her 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
to address the April 5, 2021 Study Session regarding the Police Department.  
There was no reason to delay review of the IPA's contract until August 2021. 
Rebecca Eisenberg encouraged the Council to adopt a business tax so that 
Budget cuts for nonprofits were not necessary.  The Council needed to 
disclose campaign contributions from stakeholders in items before the 
Council.   
Truc urged the Council to clarify that single-family residential (R-1) zoning 
was not going to change.  There were plenty of zoning districts where 
Planned Housing Zoning (PHZ) was appropriate and allowed. 
Ingrid Rulifson opposed the planning application to rezone an R-1 parcel on 
Wellesley Street to PHZ. 
Chuck Jagoda suggested the Council prioritize projects that created or 
preserved housing.   
Liz Gardner expressed concern that barriers for outdoor dining on California 
Avenue made crossing the street difficult.  Newspaper racks and vegetation 
obstructed sightlines at the corner where Wells Fargo was located.   
Minutes Approval 
3. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the March 1, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to approve 
the Action Minutes for the March 1, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Aram James, addressing Agenda Item Number 6, proposed naming Foothills 
Park for LaDoris Cordell and Rose Elizabeth Bird. 
Rebecca Eisenberg, addressing Agenda Item Number 4, remarked that the 
City was probably not going to meet its required subsidized housing 
production.  A possible result of this was the City being placed in 
receivership. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Stone to approve Agenda Item Numbers 4-6. 
4. 
Authorize Transmittal of the 2020 Comprehensive Plan Annual 
Progress Report to the Office of Planning and Research and the 2020 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Housing Element Annual Progress Report to the Department of 
Housing and Community Development.  
5. 
Adoption of an Ordinance Adopting an Administrative Amendment to 
the 2019 California Fire Code, Palo Alto Municipal Code Section 
15.04.075 (Definitions Added to Section 202).  
6. 
Ordinance 5518 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto to Rename Foothills Park to Foothills Nature Preserve; to Adjust 
Attendance Limits at the Preserve; and to Amend the Fiscal Year 2021 
Municipal Fee Schedule to add new Daily Entry Discounts and Annual 
Pass Fees at the Preserve (FIRST READING: February 22, 2021 
PASSED 7-0).” 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported the City planned to release additional 
information regarding the canine incident on March 16, 2021.  March 16, 
2021 was the one-year anniversary of the Shelter-in-Place Order.  A federal 
$1.9 trillion COVID-19 relief package was approved, and the City anticipated 
receiving $12 million through the Community Development Block Grant 
(CDBG) Program.  COVID-19 vaccines were limited in Santa Clara County.  
COVID-19 testing was available in Palo Alto on March 17 and 19, 2021.  The 
next Uplift Local community check-in was scheduled for March 16, 2021, and 
Wellness Wednesdays began on March 17, 2021.  The deadline to apply for 
Palo Alto Boards, Commissions and Committees was April 6, 2021.  Work at 
and around the Public Safety Building (PSB) construction site was slated to 
begin later in the week.  The Silicon Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) 
awarded the City a $2 million grant in support of an on-demand transit 
service pilot program.  An Agenda Item regarding an appeal of the City's 
Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) was tentatively scheduled for 
May 2021.   
Action Items 
Mayor DuBois advised that Agenda Item Number 8 was going to be heard 
before Agenda Item Number 7. 
6A.  PUBLIC HEARING: Finance Committee Recommends the City Council 
Approve the Park, Community, and Library Development Impact Fee 
Justification Study; Approve Adjustments to Park, Community Center, 
and Library Development Impact Fees; Adopt an Ordinance Updating 
Park Land In-lieu fees; and Direct Staff to Implement the Impact Fee 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Updates With the Fiscal Year 2022 Budget (Continued From March 8, 
2021). 
8.  
Approval of the Response to the Grand Jury Report "Why Aren't There 
More Female Fire Fighters in Santa Clara County". 
Rumi Portillo, Human Resources Director, reported the Grand Jury Report 
focused on Mountain View, San Jose, County of Santa Clara, and Palo Alto 
from 2009 to 2019.  The Grand Jury identified six general barriers to women 
becoming Firefighters.  Nationally, the number of women Firefighters 
averaged 4 percent, while in Palo Alto the number was approximately 5 
percent.  Only Mountain View showed an increase in the number of women 
Firefighters.  The City completed four of five recommendations made by the 
Grand Jury to improve gender diversity.  The Human Resources Department 
planned to work with the Fire Department to develop a gender-specific 
recruitment plan.  The hiring freeze provided an opportunity for the City to 
implement best practices.   
Geo Blackshire, Fire Chief, advised that recruiting and hiring women in the 
fire service was a national issue and had been for decades.  During his 
tenure with the Palo Alto Fire Department, three women held the rank of 
Deputy Fire Chief, three women retired at the rank of Captain, but the 
number of women Firefighters in Palo Alto was at its lowest.  He was looking 
to increase recruitment, education, awareness, and outreach in order to 
increase the number of women.  Society needed to perpetuate equality and 
equity in male-dominated roles.   
Rebecca Eisenberg felt the City needed to interview current and former 
female firefighters and explore gear and equipment designed for women.  
She offered advice for changes.   
Aram James recognized the Fire Department's efforts to increase the number 
of women, but the Police Department really needed to increase the diversity 
of its management team. 
Council Member Cormack requested the current number of women in the 
Fire Department. 
Mr. Blackshire responded four of 81 Firefighters were women. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about the amount of additional funding 
needed to increase recruitment of women. 
Mr. Blackshire indicated the Mountain View Fire Department requested 
$50,000 and received $30,000 to pay all expenses of recruitments 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
throughout California.  He suggested $30,000 to $50,000 was a reasonable 
amount for an effective program. 
Council Member Cormack looked forward to seeing an item in the Fire 
Department's budget.  There were many reasons to increase the number of 
women firefighters.  She inquired whether Fire Station Number 4 was the 
only station needing gender improvements.   
Mr. Blackshire explained that Fire Station Number 4 had separate 
accommodations for men and women, but improvements were needed. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether Staff planned to conduct a 
survey of employees regarding diversity, equity, and inclusion. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, related that a survey was proceeding on a parallel 
path. 
Council Member Stone expressed interest in a Council discussion of Mountain 
View's program and funding and suggested a goal of 10 percent women 
firefighters in Palo Alto.  He inquired about the reasons for the Grand Jury 
focusing on Palo Alto.   
Mr. Blackshire did not know. 
Council Member Stone asked if the percentages of female Firefighters and 
Police Officers were similar.   
Ms. Portillo noted that the Police Department's applicant pools were more 
gender balanced.  The Fire Department's requirement for an applicant to 
hold an Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) certificate or Paramedic 
certification impacted the Fire Department's applicant pool.  Most applicants 
for both the Police and Fire Departments typically had training and 
experience relevant to their chosen careers.  The cross-over of applicants 
was not extensive.   
Council Member Stone inquired whether the Fire Department had a female 
outreach coordinator to mentor female recruits and respond to questions.   
Ms. Portillo advised that that was going to be considered in the design of the 
diversity recruitment plan.  Research indicated the City was going to obtain 
a more balanced applicant pool with use of the new interview platform.   
Vice Mayor Burt suggested Staff target recruitments to female athletes 
because of the physically demanding roles of Firefighters and Police Officers.  
The pool of women candidates needed to expand, but the City was not 
capable of doing that alone.  He was interested in a review of the best 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
practices and outreach of cities that were successful in recruiting and 
retaining women.   
Ms. Portillo reported models of regional recruiting were in place in Southern 
California.  The City of Sunnyvale achieved good success by funding 
recruitments and recruiting in Hawaii.   
Mr. Blackshire advised that at one time the Fire Department planned to 
change the requirement for applicants to hold an EMT or Paramedic 
certification.  Obtaining a Paramedic certification required $10,000 to 
$15,000 and two years.  An EMT certification was quite popular, and many 
educational programs had waiting lists.   
Vice Mayor Burt asked if most EMT and Paramedics programs were provided 
by community colleges.   
Mr. Blackshire noted some private companies offered EMT and Paramedics 
training. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if the Fire Department considered a scholarship 
program. 
Mr. Blackshire responded yes, but that raised additional issues. 
Council Member Kou inquired about the Fire Explorer Program, its success, 
and costs. 
Mr. Blackshire was not aware of the costs of the program, but it was a 
successful program for several years.  The Fire Department did not have the 
capacity to continue the program, and few participants entered the fire 
service.   
Council Member Kou suggested a female liaison with the program might 
encourage more females to participate and enter the fire service.   
Mr. Blackshire reported the Fire Department participated in two regional 
Firefighter camps for girls.  All the teachers were female Firefighters, and the 
camps provided extensive exposure to the Firefighter's job.   
Council Member Kou inquired whether the traditional perception of male and 
female roles also caused a disparity in applicants for nursing positions.   
Ms. Portillo answered yes.  Physical requirements for public safety positions 
were often challenging for female applicants.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Council Member Filseth asked if the four female Firefighters were assigned to 
the same or different stations. 
Mr. Blackshire related that they were assigned to different stations.  During 
the probationary period, firefighters were assigned to different stations to 
gain exposure and experience.   
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to 
approve the City’s response to the 2019-2020 Santa Clara County Civil 
Grand Jury Report entitled, “Why Aren’t There More Female Firefighters in 
Santa Clara County.” 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council took a break at 8:17 P.M. and returned at 8:28 P.M. 
7.  
PUBLIC HEARING/QUASI JUDICIAL: Castilleja School Project 1310 
Bryant: Conditional Use Permit (CUP) Amendment to Increase the 
Student Enrollment cap to 540 Students With Phased Enrollment and 
Campus Redevelopment, a Variance to Replace Campus Gross Floor 
Area 
and 
Architectural 
Review 
Approval 
of 
the 
Campus 
Redevelopment. Zone District: R-1(10,000). Environmental Review: 
Final Environmental Impact Report (EIR) Published July 30, 2020; 
Draft EIR Published July 15, 2019. 
Mayor DuBois noted the voluminous Staff Report provided to Council 
Members.  The Council heard public testimony on March 8, 2021, and was 
not taking additional public comment. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, reported the 
Council received presentations from Staff and the Applicant and public 
comments on March 8, 2021.  Staff submitted an at-places memo with an 
updated Staff recommendation to remand the project to the Architectural 
Review Board (ARB) to consider design changes. 
Mayor DuBois requested Council Members discuss components of the 
application separately because some decisions were going to impact other 
decisions.  He proposed the following order of components:  the 
underground parking facility; enrollment and Transportation Demand 
Management (TDM) Plan; questions and clarification regarding the 
Environmental Impact Report (EIR); special events; other conditions of 
approval; and the variance, Conditional Use Permit (CUP), and Architectural 
Review (AR) findings. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Council Member Stone requested Staff's rationale for classifying the 
underground parking facility as a basement. 
Mr. Lait noted Staff acknowledged their interpretation throughout the 
application review process. 
Albert Yang, Assistant City Attorney, advised that it was a parking facility.  
That was the best definition in the Municipal Code.  The question was 
whether Staff needed to count it as gross floor area.  The City's regulations 
on gross floor area for the single-family residential (R-1) zone did not use 
the term parking facility.  Staff attempted to fit the facility into one of the 
definitions enumerated in the gross floor area regulations.   
Council Member Stone noted the definition of parking facility included 
garage, and under the Municipal Code a garage was included in ground-floor 
area calculation.  Arguing that the parking garage was more analogous to an 
R-1 basement than a parking garage simply because the Code stated the 
definition applied to a residential use was not reasonable.  This was clearly a 
parking garage, not a basement. 
Mr. Lait agreed that it was a parking facility.  The question was whether or 
not it counted toward floor area.  The Council previously narrowed Staff's 
interpretive authority.  The definitions of carports and garages clearly 
applied to residential properties.  This issue was before the Council. 
Council Member Stone reiterated the definition of parking facility.  There 
seemed to be a clear definition.  The Applicant's attorney submitted a letter 
dated September 8, 2020 admitting that it was a parking facility.   
Mr. Yang agreed that the definition of parking facility listed both garage and 
carport.  Every garage was a parking facility, but not every parking facility 
was a garage. 
Council Member Stone wanted to understand why Staff chose the basement 
definition rather than the parking facility definition for ground-floor area. 
Mr. Yang explained that the definition of gross floor area did not speak to 
parking facilities generally.  It was reasonable to extrapolate from carport 
and garage to say parking facility generally.  Staff reviewed previous 
interpretations to determine what was done.  This was one possible 
interpretation, but certainly not the only one. 
Council Member Filseth reiterated that the Code was not clear as to the 
disposition of nonresidential garages in R-1 neighborhoods.  Therefore, there 
was room to interpret.  In commercial areas, nonresidential underground 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
garages did not count toward floor area ratio (FAR).  Above-ground garages 
in R-1 zones counted toward FAR.  Underground garages for single-family 
homes in R-1 neighborhoods were not allowed.  He asked why underground 
garages were not allowed in R-1 neighborhoods.  
Amy French, Chief Planning Official, related that the 1998 Municipal Code 
prohibited below-grade parking for a single-family home in several of the 
low-density districts.  Putting a garage underground enabled a larger home.  
Because the maximum house size was 6,000 square feet, property owners 
put a garage below grade, which raised safety concerns.   
Council Member Filseth asked if allowing only one underground garage per 
residential block alleviated the safety concerns.   
Ms. French answered yes. 
Council Member Filseth noted above-ground garages counted toward FAR to 
limit the amount of massing on a lot of a given size.  He inquired regarding 
the reasons for allowing a basement to extend beyond the building footprint 
in residential districts.   
Ms. French indicated the reasons included the definition of height. 
Council Member Kou believed the issues pertained to policy as well as quasi-
judicial matters.  The order of components was backwards in some ways.  
The EIR was the most important component for this project. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to discuss the Environmental Impact Report (EIR) portion of this 
item before other items.  
Council Member Cormack suggested beginning with the EIR was appropriate 
because it formed the basis of the review. 
Mayor DuBois felt learning Council Members' positions on the garage and 
enrollment was going to speed the rest of the discussion. 
MOTION PASSED:  5-2 DuBois, Filseth no 
Vice Mayor Burt understood the intent of the Motion was to discuss the EIR 
after the garage. 
Council Member Kou intended to stop the discussion of the garage and move 
to the EIR.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Council Member Kou inquired about a limit on the number of people 
attending the five major events. 
Mr. Lait advised that the Conditions of Approval, rather than the Mitigation 
Monitoring and Reporting Program (MMRP), continued the standard 
contained in the current CUP.  The current standard was 500 people.   
Council Member Kou inquired regarding a monetary deposit for potential 
damage to the historic building. 
Mr. Lait indicated the Applicant was taking precautions, and much of the 
major construction was not occurring near the location. 
Ms. French reported removing the historic building was intended to improve 
its condition.  A deposit was never mentioned.   
Council Member Kou was concerned about the possibility of the historic 
building being demolished.   
Council Member Cormack asked if certifying the EIR and denying the CUP 
was possible. 
Mr. Lait replied yes, but certification was unnecessary if the Council denied 
the CUP. 
Council Member Cormack asked if certifying the EIR required the Council to 
allow the underground garage. 
Mr. Lait responded no. 
Council Member Cormack asked Staff to address Mr. Dockter's comments 
regarding Tree Numbers 140 and 155. 
Ms. French reported Tree Number 140 was located near an existing 
classroom and proposed for removal.  It was in fair to poor condition.  Tree 
Number 155 was in fair condition and located in the path of a driveway to 
the below-grade trash and recycling area.  Mitigation measures in the EIR as 
well as conditions of approval addressed the trees.  The Applicant originally 
proposed relocating the trees, but the Urban Forestry Division suggested a 
successful relocation of the trees was going to be difficult.  In addition, the 
trees were located within the buildable area of the lot. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff supported the EIR as written. 
Ms. French responded yes. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff was confident in the transportation 
section of the EIR.  There seemed to be an omission of some crash data for 
Bryant. 
Katherine Waugh, Dudek, reported bicycle crash data pertained to 
Castilleja's frontage along Bryant Street from 2015 through 2018.  The 
analysis evaluated the traffic conditions, specifically bicycle conditions, along 
the roadway for the period shortly before and after submission of the 
application.  Expanding the area did not increase the rate of accidents and 
crashes beyond the range of normal traffic conditions throughout the state.  
The traffic volumes that the project contributed did not indicate that the 
project was going to exacerbate any existing conditions related to bicycle 
safety in the project vicinity. 
Council Member Cormack interpreted Ms. Waugh's response as the accident 
that the member of the public referenced occurred at an intersection, which 
was not part of the segment studied. 
Ms. Waugh clarified that the accident referenced by the public occurred at 
the intersection of Embarcadero and Bryant. 
Council Member Stone asked Staff to respond to the March 10, 2021 letter 
from Preserve Neighborhood Quality of Life's (PNQL) attorney regarding 
Footnote 16 and buildable area. 
Mr. Yang reported the attorney alleged that the project was not eligible to 
utilize the provision about buildable area because the application included a 
variance.  Staff strongly disagreed.  The concept of buildable area pertained 
to not encroaching into setbacks.  Clearly, the provision addressed a 
variance to build outside the normal buildable area.  The requested variance 
for FAR was entirely unrelated to buildable area.   
Council Member Stone asked if this was the part of the Ordinance that 
discussed no existing building footprint. 
Mr. Yang answered yes. 
Council Member Stone expressed concerns that approving the project was 
going to set a precedent and that the Tree Ordinance was being used to 
justify the removal of protected trees.   
Mr. Lait did not know whether the professionals in the Public Works 
Department shared Mr. Dockter's perspective either today or when Mr. 
Dockter worked for the City. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Walter Passmore, Urban Forester, explained that the Code provided certain 
allowances that could be applied for removal of a protected tree.  Different 
allowances were cited for different trees in the project.  Trees within the 
building footprint were allowed to be removed.  Tree Number 140 was 
located very close to an existing building.  Construction within the existing 
building footprint was going to jeopardize the health of the tree.  Staff 
considered it as located within the building footprint.  Tree Number 155 was 
currently surrounded by an above-grade planter.  Staff had to interpret 
whether the planter was an extension of the building or whether the building 
footprint extended into that area.   
Mayor DuBois clarified that Council Members were referring to Mr. Dockter's 
second email to the Council.   
Council Member Filseth inquired whether Mr. Dockter was correct that a 
Statement of Overriding Consideration was needed to certify the EIR 
because there was an unmitigated, unavoidable and significant impact.   
Mr. Lait was not previously aware of Mr. Dockter's March 11, 2021 email.  
Buildable area was the area located outside the setbacks but within the 
parcel.  The Code provided a process for removing trees located within the 
buildable area.  The two trees were located within the buildable area, and 
removal of them was consistent with the language of the Code.   
Ms. French indicated the goal was not to remove trees if they were healthy.  
A tree's location within the buildable area was a good reason to consider 
removal if other options were not viable or if a tree was not going to survive 
demolition or construction.   
Mr. Lait read the pertinent Code provision.  The trees were located within the 
buildable area of the lot.  Staff was not setting a precedent or interpreting 
the provision differently than in the past.  The Code allowed removal of the 
trees; therefore, a Statement of Overriding Considerations was not needed.   
Council Member Filseth requested the rationale for allowing removal if a 
building existed on the lot but prohibiting removal if there was not an 
existing building.   
Mr. Lait stated the Code provided a process for removing protected trees.  
The Code encouraged the preservation of trees but also provided a process 
for removal of protected trees.   
Vice Mayor Burt inquired whether the Code allowing removal precluded a 
finding that removal was an environmental impact.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Mr. Lait noted the Council may find that removal was undesirable and 
detrimental.  Through the discretionary approval process, the Council was 
allowed to change the direction of the project. 
Ms. Waugh stated under California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), 
removal of a large, beautiful tree was not considered a significant impact 
unless the City's Ordinances prohibited that action. 
Vice Mayor Burt inquired about other options in design that avoided the 
removal of protected trees. 
Mr. Lait reported requesting design modifications that achieved the Council's 
interest in preserving trees was within the Council's purview. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if Mr. Passmore approved the design and if the tree 
information on the drawings was accurate. 
Mr. Passmore suggested design modifications that resulted in the removal of 
fewer trees were possible, but they were discretionary decisions that were 
better discussed outside the context of the EIR.   
Mr. Lait advised that proposed conditions of approval related to trees. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if the proposed mitigations were adequate to save 
protected trees as well as various trees that were potentially threatened by 
the project. 
Ms. French advised that dewatering was not proposed for construction of the 
pool because the depth was above the highest level of the water table.  The 
level of the water table varied at different times of the year. 
Mr. Passmore noted some unresolved questions about a few trees, including 
Tree Number 89, which was adjacent to the pool.   
Mr. Lait stated two conditions of approval required an arborist to be onsite 
during construction activity in the area of Tree Number 89 and the Applicant 
to provide additional detail work prior to beginning construction.  An 
Applicant was not allowed to obtain a variance to build within a setback and 
count the area within the setback as buildable area in order to remove a 
tree.  The language about a variance was not applicable to the current 
project.   
Mayor DuBois asked if it was possible to require an onsite survey to 
determine the existing square footage. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Mr. Lait replied yes.  Floor area was included in the Staff recommendation to 
remand the project to the ARB. 
Mayor DuBois requested the consequences of a survey finding a number 
substantially different from 4,000 square feet. 
Mr. Lait noted some area counted toward the FAR was actually below grade 
and did not need to be counted.  Additional work was needed, but the final 
number was not likely to be substantially greater than 4,000 square feet.   
Mayor DuBois requested the route a vehicle was going to travel to reach the 
Bryant Street driveway. 
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, advised that vehicles were 
probably going to turn onto Bryant from Embarcadero. 
Mayor DuBois asked if vehicles traveling to Kellogg were going to be 
discouraged from turning onto Bryant. 
Mr. Kamhi believed vehicles traveling north on Bryant were going to turn left 
onto Kellogg to reach the driveway.   
Mayor DuBois inquired whether trees around the parking structure needed to 
be protected. 
Ms. French related that the Applicant believed saving the trees was possible 
and submitted documentation for that.  Proposed conditions of approval 
related to protecting the trees. 
Mr. Lait indicated that if the Council found the subterranean garage was 
permissible, it was possible to redesign it to provide additional room to those 
trees. 
Council Member Filseth requested the reasons Staff did not seek a bond for 
the trees given the extent of construction. 
Mr. Passmore explained that a condition of approval sought a security 
deposit.  The Tree Technical Manual set the maximum amount at 150 
percent of appraised value.  Staff also requested the Applicant update the 
appraised values of the trees based on current measurements.   
Council Member Filseth inquired whether the Applicant was going to post 
that amount and, if the trees died, the funds were going to be used to 
replace them. 
Mr. Passmore answered correct. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Council Member Filseth concurred with Mayor DuBois' comments regarding 
the square footage.  If the above-ground square footage increased, he did 
not support granting the variance.  If it decreased or remained the same, he 
possibly supported Condition 1.   
Mr. Lait reported the Applicant did not intend and Staff did not recommend 
allowing above-ground gross floor area greater than currently existed.  Staff 
needed to know the precise existing gross floor area. 
Council Member Cormack commented that the project was going to increase 
vehicular traffic on Bryant but not above the level that was safe for the bike 
boulevard. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified the Planning and Transportation Commission's (PTC) 
recommendation as maintaining the average daily trips measured during the 
EIR process.  Consequently, the number of trips was not necessarily going to 
increase.  Bicyclists southbound on Bryant crossed Embarcadero and 
remained to the left of vehicles queued for a right turn into Castilleja.  
Elimination of one driveway reduced the potential for conflicts and enhanced 
bicycle safety.  Bicyclists traveling southbound on Bryant to reach Castilleja 
crossed Embarcadero to the corner of Castilleja's property and turned right 
to travel a short ways on the Embarcadero sidewalk and then turn left into 
the property.   
Council Member Cormack asked if vehicles traveling east on Embarcadero 
were prohibited from turning right onto Bryant when bikes were crossing 
Embarcadero.   
Mr. Kamhi indicated such a prohibition was not part of the proposal. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about net new car trips. 
Mr. Kamhi answered that no net new trips were allowed.   
Ms. French added that there were 383 AM peak hour trips and 1,198 
average daily trips.   
Council Member Cormack requested the page number in the Record of Land 
Use Action (RLUA) for that information. 
Mr. Kamhi replied Section 8, Condition 22. 
Council Member Stone requested the Code section that justified allowing the 
removal of trees.  Section 8.10.050 listed the exceptions to the prohibition 
against removing protected trees. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Mr. Yang stated Staff relied on different sections for different trees but 
primarily relied on Sections 8.10.050(b)(1) and (b)(2).  Mr. Dockter 
previously indicated that Section 8.10.050(b)(2) was historically interpreted 
as applying to vacant lots, but that was not Staff's experience. 
Council Member Stone requested an explanation since obviously a building 
footprint existed on the site. 
Mr. Yang clarified that the phrase "no existing building footprint" referred to 
the location of the existing protected tree and not to the lot as a whole.  
Section 8.10.050(b)(1) applied to locations where there was an existing 
building footprint. 
Mr. Lait added that Section 8.10.050(b)(1) discussed a scenario where a 
tree and the building footprint conflicted with each other.  Section 
8.10.050(b)(2) discussed a scenario with no conflict between a tree and the 
building footprint, but the tree was located within the buildable area.   
Mr. Passmore explained that a property owner was allowed by zoning and 
Code to construct a home addition.  Designing the addition around a tree 
was not always possible.  Staff struggled with whether a protected tree 
should prohibit a property owner from building an allowed home addition.  
The Code allowed the removal of a protected tree in certain instances. 
Council Member Stone did not understand Staff's justification that the Code 
language concerning a variance did not apply to the variance for FAR 
because any additional building on the site required a variance. 
Mr. Lait explained that the tree's location and a variance conflicted when the 
Applicant wanted to build in an area where a tree was not otherwise 
impacted by buildable area.  The requested variance for floor area did not 
relate to the location of the structure.   
Council Member Stone asked if there was a Code provision or general 
doctrine that unclear or conflicting Code provisions were supposed to be 
read in the most stringent way possible. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, was not familiar with that general principle.  
Staff followed the standard rules of statutory construction. 
Vice Mayor Burt understood the environmental analysis reviewed trips to the 
campus and asked if it also reviewed trips generated by vehicles traveling to 
the area of Castilleja but not specifically to the campus. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Ms. Waugh reported traffic counts were based on observations of vehicles 
arriving and departing campus and based on a student survey regarding 
modes of transportation.  The survey captured students who parked or were 
dropped off a few blocks from campus.   
Vice Mayor Burt believed students did not self-report violations of policy.  
The survey probably did not provide reliable information.  Satellite parking 
helped immediate neighbors and the school site but shifted the impact 
elsewhere in the community.  He inquired whether the data captured that. 
Ms. Waugh advised that the TDM Plan and AR did not rely on any specific 
satellite parking.   
Vice Mayor Burt asked if there was not any satellite parking currently.  He 
was told there was. 
Ms. Waugh reiterated that satellite parking was not part of the analysis. 
Mark Spencer, W-Trans, indicated he did not assume the use of offsite 
parking.  Perhaps it was proposed in the TDM Plan.  The effects of additional 
students were extrapolated from direct observation of car trips.  The analysis 
did not include offsite parking as they were not aware of any offsite parking.   
Vice Mayor Burt requested a representative of Castilleja respond to the 
question of existing satellite parking for students and/or staff and any plans 
to expand it.   
Kathy Layendecker, Castilleja School, advised that satellite parking for 
employees only was located at First Presbyterian Church.  The TDM Plan 
recommended satellite parking, but additional satellite parking was probably 
not necessary. 
Vice Mayor Burt expressed concern that Staff and the consultant were not 
aware of the current use of satellite parking. 
Ms. French related that the use of satellite parking was focused on events. 
Vice Mayor Burt noted the use of satellite parking for special events was 
contained in the 2000 TDM Plan.  That was different from the information 
just shared with the Council. 
Council Member Tanaka requested perspectives of individual Commissioners 
and the overall PTC regarding the EIR. 
Bart Hechtman, PTC Liaison, could not provide the perspectives of individual 
Commissioners.  The PTC heard the EIR first because Commissioners felt it 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
was necessary to determine mitigation measures before considering 
conditions of approval.  The vote on the EIR was four to recommend 
certification, one not to recommend certification, and two absent.  The 
Commissioner opposed to certification wanted to continue the discussion to a 
subsequent meeting.  The PTC held a significant amount of discussion and 
reached consensus that the EIR was extraordinarily comprehensive and 
addressed a wide variety of concerns and that mitigation measures reduced 
impacts to a level of insignificance. 
Mayor DuBois inquired whether parking requirements changed if students 
were allowed to drive to school as a condition of approval. 
Mr. Lait responded no.  The Council had discretion to impose conditions and 
reduce the number of parking spaces through various entitlements. 
Ms. French added that a parking adjustment was required to reduce the 
number of parking spaces provided on the property based on the number of 
classrooms.   
Mayor DuBois asked if there was a reason that the Council could not apply 
the dispersed circulation to other EIR alternatives, specifically the moderate 
enrollment with reduced parking and the no garage option. 
Ms. Waugh explained that project alternatives reflected the project 
objectives, the project as designed, and significant environmental impacts.  
The dispersed circulation alternative came up later in the process and was 
not applied to specific alternatives.  Another version of dispersed circulation 
that allowed drivers to turn left or proceed straight was considered.  That 
version resulted in traffic impacts in other locations.   
Mayor DuBois expressed concerns about the contribution to cumulative land 
uses, survivability of the trees, enforceability of the TDM Plan, noise, and 
potential growth inducement.  The Council needed to consider a condition of 
approval prohibiting the use of amplified sound.  If the Council determined 
that the underground garage was not allowed, the EIR probably was not 
relevant. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether vehicles were allowed to turn left from 
Embarcadero. 
Mr. Kamhi replied yes. 
Council Member Kou expressed concern regarding the number of vehicles 
crossing the bicycle boulevard.  She asked if a tree had to be deemed a 
hazard or unhealthy prior to it being removed. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Mr. Lait answered yes if the tree was not located within the buildable area. 
Council Member Kou found Mr. Dockter's report compelling and shared her 
experiences with homes designed around existing trees.   
Vice Mayor Burt inquired whether the CEQA analysis reviewed the goals of 
increasing the mode share of bicycling and adopting micro-mobility trends. 
Mr. Kamhi did not believe the analysis addressed those points specifically.   
Ms. Waugh reported the analysis did not consider increases in bicycling. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if the revised floor area or counting the garage in 
floor area necessitated a review of the EIR. 
Mr. Lait answered no. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if CEQA allowed an analysis of the impacts to the 
historic building subsequent to the CEQA approval. 
Mr. Lait reported there was no historic impact.   
Ms. French clarified that the Historic Resources Board (HRB) reviewed the 
project for compliance with Secretary of the Interior Standards.  The project 
was referred to the ARB subcommittee regarding the metal stair rail.   
Mayor DuBois asked if eliminating the garage affected the EIR. 
Mr. Lait responded yes, because circulation was impacted. 
Mayor DuBois requested Council Members resume the parking structure 
discussion. 
Council Member Cormack asked if allowing the underground garage but not 
counting it toward floor area set a precedent. 
Mr. Lait advised that that a text amendment was needed.  The language of 
the amendment determined the number of parcels affected by the 
amendment.  Given the unique characteristics of the property and the use, 
drafting the amendment narrowly was possible. 
Council Member Cormack requested the reasons the ARB supported an 
underground garage. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Osma Thompson, Architectural Review Board Member, indicated the ARB 
believed an underground garage was aesthetically superior to an above-
ground garage and consistent with goals in the Comprehensive Plan.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the ARB changed the design of any visible 
portions of the garage. 
Ms. Thompson stated the ARB wanted to review a staircase again. 
Council Member Cormack found the ARB's support of an underground garage 
persuasive.   
Council Member Filseth felt the fundamental issues were public health, 
safety, and general welfare in the surrounding area.  The main concerns 
were traffic, noise, trees, and aesthetics to some extent.  Counting the 
garage toward floor area was not logical.  Defining the underground garage 
as a basement was too much of a contortion, and a text amendment was 
reasonable.   
Council Member Stone inquired whether Section 18.01.050 applied to the 
entire Code or only Title 18. 
Ms. Stump advised that the section probably applied to conflicting provisions 
within the Code and between local and State laws.   
Mr. Yang indicated the Council had the option of directing Staff to prepare a 
Code amendment or adopting an interpretation of an ambiguous Code 
provision.   
Council Member Stone asked if the Council needed to apply the facts and law 
in making its decision. 
Ms. Stump responded yes.   
Council Member Stone asked if Castilleja needed City approval to build an 
at-grade parking facility on the sports field. 
Ms. Stump understood an at-grade parking facility with that number of 
spaces required a substantial redesign of the project.   
Mr. Lait suggested the Director was allowed to present items of public 
interest to the Council for decision.  Because this item was of great public 
interest, the Director was highly likely to present it to the Council. 
Council Member Kou felt the prohibition against underground garages in the 
R-1 district applied to this project.  The garage was intended to 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
accommodate an enrollment increase.  The Applicant needed to provide its 
build-out model so that the Council and community understood the potential 
density.  She questioned whether Castilleja might find another location for 
its school and whether the Council was going to allow other uses to exist and 
expand within R-1 neighborhoods.   
Vice Mayor Burt noted an underground garage of a certain size was likely a 
preferred site design for the project, but attempting to rationalize an 
underground garage as a basement was a poor decision.  Interpreting the 
lack of a prohibition as permission was erroneous.  The size of the garage 
was a concern because of its impacts on trees, ingress, and egress.  
Increasing the number of Palo Alto students to 40 percent and the number 
of East Palo Alto students provided multiple benefits.   
Mayor DuBois noted the City's support of Castilleja.  He questioned Staff's 
ability to narrow the language of a text amendment to prevent unintended 
consequences.  Past Councils probably intentionally prohibited underground 
parking in R-1 zones because large underground structures in R-1 zones 
were an intensification of use.  Past Councils also discussed whether 
basements needed to count toward FAR.  The underground parking facility 
was inconsistent with the Zoning Code, and the Council needed to count it 
toward FAR.  A smaller garage was logical.  The no-garage option with 
dispersed drop-off was a possibility.   
Council Member Stone concurred that the garage needed to count toward 
FAR and was willing to consider a text amendment.  He liked Vice Mayor 
Burt's concept of reducing the size of the garage and increasing the number 
of Palo Alto and low-income students.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the Applicant comment regarding 
increasing local enrollment and redesigning the project. 
Nanci Kauffman, Castilleja School, reported the project was the plan for full 
build-out.  The majority of teachers commuted to school.  The majority of 
students who lived the furthest away commuted by train or shuttle.  The 
Code required a specific number of parking spaces.  Eliminating the 
underground parking meant replacing green space with surface parking.  The 
size of the garage had been reduced a few times. 
Council Member Tanaka noted the EIR was quite extensive.  With the 
ambiguity in the Code language, the Council had to consider what was best 
for the community.  Surface parking was less expensive to construct, but 
green space was aesthetically pleasing.  He inquired whether the Applicant 
was allowed to replace the field with parking. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Mr. Lait replied yes, not by right but through a process. 
Council Member Tanaka felt underground parking was a greater good for the 
community.   
Council Member Kou noted the environmental impacts of constructing an 
underground parking garage.  Those impacts and the school's location in an 
R-1 neighborhood were concerns.  The school's business model was not the 
Council's concern.  She did not support the project with an underground 
garage. 
Vice Mayor Burt anticipated that an overwhelming percentage of students 
was going to utilize bicycles or micro-mobility to commute to school.  
Perhaps the TDM Plan needed to restrict students from driving to school or 
limit driving to juniors or juniors and seniors.  He inquired about the number 
of students who did drive to school. 
Ms. Kauffman reported less than 50 percent of students arrived in a single-
occupancy vehicle. 
Vice Mayor Burt requested the number of staff members needed to 
accommodate enrollment above 415 students. 
Ms. Kauffman replied at least two teachers. 
Vice Mayor Burt did not believe the Council was ready to make a decision 
regarding the garage.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Stone to 
direct Staff to: 
A. 
Treat the underground parking facility as an underground garage and 
not as a basement; and 
B. 
Return to Council with an alternative text change counting all the 
underground garage as floor area;  
i. 
Return to Council with an alternative of not counting floor area 
or partially counting floor area; and 
ii. 
Evaluate the implication of the text change on other properties in 
R-1 zones. 
Mayor DuBois requested Staff's comments regarding the Motion.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Mr. Lait was not sure that Staff could provide more information as directed 
in the Motion.   
Vice Mayor Burt felt the Council needed to understand the implications of a 
text amendment on other properties.   
Mr. Lait remarked that Staff needed to consider size of parcels, intended 
uses, locations of streets, and other factors to craft a narrow set of 
regulations for Castilleja.  With Council direction, Staff was able to craft 
language and provide the implications of that language. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if a narrow set of regulations was spot zoning. 
Mr. Lait clarified that spot zoning was not illegal if it was supported or 
warranted for general welfare. 
Mayor DuBois suggested discussing the remaining issues may assist the 
Council in making decisions. 
Council Member Stone commented that not understanding the various 
alternatives was a challenge. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether Part B of the Motion implied a 
redesign of the project.   
Mr. Lait responded yes. 
Council Member Cormack was not interested in a redesign at this time.  Her 
concept for the second part of Part B was a very narrow text amendment 
that applied to Castilleja's site only and the number of parcels affected by a 
broader text amendment. 
Council Member Kou did not understand Part B of the Motion.  Staff probably 
needed to know the exact amount of existing and proposed square footage.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to direct Staff to have an independent analysis of 
the existing floor area both above and below ground. (New Part C) 
Council Member Filseth questioned the value of Parts A and B of the Motion.  
The Motion seemed to avoid the issue of approving or denying the garage. 
Council Member Tanaka noted the late hour and the inability to think clearly 
and concisely.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by 
Council Member Kou to continue this item to March 29, 2021. 
Council Member Tanaka preferred to consider the many important and legal 
issues with a clear head.  Perhaps determining the correct square footage 
prior to March 29, 2021 was possible. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, did not believe that was sufficient time for the 
Applicant to resolve the square footage. 
Council Member Cormack opposed the Substitute Motion because enrollment 
was a pivotal issue. 
Council Member Filseth wanted to accomplish something prior to adjourning 
the meeting. 
Vice Mayor Burt clarified that Part B directed Staff to return with a couple of 
alternatives and the ramifications of them.  The items were intended to 
increase the productivity of the next discussion. 
Mayor DuBois wanted to touch on enrollment before continuing the 
discussion. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED:  2-5 Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Stone 
no 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether counting all the underground 
garage as floor area required a redesign of the project. 
Mr. Lait answered yes, if the Council wanted the garage to count toward 
floor area and did not want to increase the existing floor area.  He clarified 
that he was able to provide a text amendment that met the Council's goals, 
but Staff was not going to know if the Council wanted a subterranean garage 
prior to the next meeting. 
Vice Mayor Burt reiterated that Council was not ready to decide about the 
garage in the current meeting. 
Vice Mayor Burt was interested in the Applicant's and neighbors' responses 
to the Motion. 
Council Member Cormack understood the PTC instead of Staff was charged 
with doing this type of work for the Council.   
Vice Mayor Burt stated that was not part of the Motion. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Mr. Lait explained that Council Member Cormack was referring to a 
statement in the Staff Report.  He proposed the Council discuss the 
remaining issues prior to reopening the Public Hearing. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council 
Member Stone to direct Staff to: 
A. 
Treat the underground parking facility as an underground garage and 
not as a basement; 
B. 
Return to Council with an alternative text change counting all the 
underground garage as floor area; 
i. 
Return to Council with an alternative of not counting floor area 
or partially counting floor area; and 
ii. 
Evaluate the implication of the text change on other properties in 
R-1 zones; and 
C. 
Have an independent analysis of the existing floor area both above and 
below ground. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  4-3 Cormack, Filseth, Tanaka no 
Council Member Cormack requested the motivation for increasing enrollment 
and the benefits of increasing enrollment for current and future students, 
the school, and the community. 
Ms. Kauffman reported the motivations were reaching more girls and 
enhancing programs.  The high school was too small to provide students 
with the opportunities they needed to be successful.  The school needed to 
create a different social environment for girls.  An all-girls high school 
experience was more popular than ever, and the demand was exponentially 
greater than in the past.  Increasing enrollment was also going to increase 
the number of students receiving tuition assistance.  Castilleja offered a 
strong program for first-generation students whose families had not 
considered college.  An enrollment of 540 students was intended to increase 
the number of students in small classes without increasing the number of 
staff or the number of car trips.   
Council Member Cormack indicated the Staff Report stated Castilleja needed 
an additional ten employees for full project build-out. 
Ms. Kauffman was not familiar with the number.  If it was provided in the 
report, it was probably accurate.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Council Member Cormack asked if Castilleja had 122 full-time employees. 
Ms. Kauffman replied yes. 
Council Member Filseth noted other private schools encountered the same 
constraints as Castilleja.  Because of Castilleja's 100-year-old legacy and 
rich tradition, he did not want to tell Castilleja to leave.  Mitigating all the 
impacts was difficult and expensive.  Asking the neighborhood to shoulder all 
the cost was not right.  The Council's mission was to determine and organize 
all the costs and provide Castilleja with an opportunity to decide what to do.  
He was interested in discussing noise, traffic, trees, and aesthetics. 
Council Member Stone expressed interest in tying a public benefit to 
increased enrollment and requested the number of low-income students 
attending Castilleja and the requirements to receive tuition assistance.   
Ms. Kauffman advised that quite a few students were on full tuition 
assistance and agreed to provide the information.   
Council Member Stone requested the rationale for increasing the number of 
onsite parking spaces if there were no net new trips and no additional staff. 
Ms. Kauffman indicated additional spaces were needed to comply with 
parking requirements.  Parking requirements changed after Castilleja 
received its current CUP.  Additional parking spaces and shuttles were meant 
to reduce the number of students parking in the neighborhood. 
Council Member Stone requested plans, if any, to track student and staff 
parking. 
Ms. Kauffman related that staff monitored surrounding streets during drop-
off and pick-up.   
Vice Mayor Burt was interested in understanding the baseline for trip 
reductions, the TDM Plan, and a Residential Preferential Permit Parking 
Program (RPP) for the neighborhood. 
Council Member Kou requested information regarding the addition of 
shuttles.  She inquired whether the Council was going to receive public 
comment regarding the Motion. 
Mr. Lait reiterated that the Public Hearing was going to be reopened once 
the Council concluded deliberations. 
Ms. Stump clarified that public comment was going to be heard on March 29, 
2021. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 28 of 28 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/15/2021 
Council Member Kou suggested Castilleja possibly outgrew its current site.   
Mayor DuBois commented that understanding the need for a parking garage 
was difficult even after the explanations.  The Council needed to discuss 
Castilleja's density.  He was inclined to support the PTC's recommendation 
for Castilleja to achieve some TDM targets prior to the Council approving an 
enrollment increase.  The variance was a large request, and the situation did 
not appear to be unique or to cause substantial hardship.   
Mayor DuBois announced the item was continued to March 29, 2021. 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Mayor DuBois reported the Cities Association adopted a Resolution opposing 
hate crimes against Asian people.  Office hours with the Mayor were 
scheduled for Fridays, 10:30 a.m. to noon.  He appointed Council Members 
Kou and Cormac and himself to the Council Ad Hoc Committee to meet with 
Palo Alto Unified School District (PAUSD) Board of Education Members 
regarding Cubberley Community Center.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 12:19 A.M. 
