CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 7 
Regular Meeting 
January 4, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 6:03 P.M. 
Participating Remotely:  Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Special Orders of the Day 
Adrian Fine, Former Mayor, recognized dignitaries attending the meeting. 
1. 
Swearing in of the Four Incoming Council Members Lydia Kou, Greg 
Tanaka, Patrick Burt, and Greer Stone. 
Beth Minor, City Clerk, administered the oath of office to Lydia Kou, Greg Tanaka, 
Patrick Burt, and Greer Stone. 
2. 
Election of the 2021 Mayor. 
Vice Mayor DuBois summarized the process for electing the  Mayor and Vice 
Mayor.   
NOMINATION: Council Member Filseth nominated Vice Mayor DuBois for 
Mayor for 2021. 
Council Member Filseth reported Vice Mayor DuBois was consistently a voice 
for reason and data as well as intelligent and mature.  After serving six 
years on the Council, Vice Mayor DuBois had a wealth of experience that 
served him and other Council Members well.  Council Member Filseth 
highlighted Vice Mayor DuBois' service on Council committees and topics for 
which Vice Mayor DuBois advocated.   
Council Member Cormack believed frank discussions helped Vice Mayor 
DuBois and her achieve better outcomes when they worked together. 
Council Member Burt indicated Vice Mayor DuBois was smart, thoughtful, 
and unflappable.  He listened, learned, and grew during his tenure on 
Council.  Vice Mayor DuBois had policy and financial experience.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 7 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 01/04/2021 
Council Member Kou noted Vice Mayor DuBois served the City and the 
community with integrity, fairness, and dignity.   
Winter Dellenbach supported Vice Mayor DuBois for Mayor because he was 
intelligent and rational and had a good heart and sense of humor. 
Rebecca Eisenberg supported Vice Mayor DuBois for Mayor because of his 
even temperament and respect for everyone. 
Terry Holzemer remarked that Vice Mayor DuBois worked tirelessly over the 
past six years to support the residents of Palo Alto and viewed being a 
Council Member as a public service to the community.  Vice Mayor DuBois 
was always thoughtful and prepared.   
Mora Oommen, Youth Community Services, thanked Vice Mayor DuBois for 
his support of youth. 
Shani Kleinhaus noted Vice Mayor DuBois' sensible, fair, and balanced 
approach to leadership.   
NOMINATION FOR VICE MAYOR DUBOIS PASSED: 7-0 
Mayor DuBois committed to doing his best as Mayor and thanked his family 
and friends for their support.  Public service emphasized leadership through 
service.  His priorities for 2021 were economic vitality and recovery, land 
use realignment and incentives for affordable housing, and transportation.  
Additional priorities were homelessness, utilities, and City events.  He 
thanked City Staff for their dedication and hard work.   
3. 
Election of the 2021 Vice Mayor. 
NOMINATION: Mayor DuBois nominated Council Member Burt for Vice 
Mayor for 2021.  
NOMINATION: Council Member Tanaka nominated Council Member Kou for 
Vice Mayor for 2021.  
NOMINATION: Council Member Filseth nominated Council Member 
Cormack for Vice Mayor for 2021.  
Mayor DuBois advised that Council Member Burt received the most votes in 
the election.  He was an experienced Council Member and business 
executive.  His skills in building consensus were needed to recover from 
COVID-19.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 7 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 01/04/2021 
Council Member Tanaka believed Council Member Kou's skills were 
complementary to Mayor DuBois' skills.  She would increase diversity among 
City leadership.  Council Member Kou worked on airplane noise and grade 
separations and listened to the community.   
Council Member Filseth reported Council Member Cormack was disciplined, 
methodical, and organized.  She attacked problems with critical thinking and 
professionalism.  Based on the number of votes cast for her in 2018, the 
community supported her.   
Council Member Burt commented that this was an exceptionally challenging 
time, and he was capable of assisting Mayor DuBois and Staff with working 
through the challenges.  He looked forward to building consensus among 
Council Members and the community.   
Council Member Kou emphasized the need to focus on economic recovery, 
community health and wellness, localism, and regional issues.   
Council Member Cormack highlighted her ability to make difficult decisions, 
to put the good of the whole above her own desires, and to participate in 
both joyous and somber events.   
Council Member Stone indicated experienced leadership was needed to guide 
the City to a healthy and prosperous future.  He summarized Council 
Member Burt's service to the community and experience.  While Council 
Member Kou and Council Member Cormack were qualified and good choices 
for Vice Mayor, only Council Member Burt had the civic and business 
experience to lead the City with Mayor DuBois. 
Arthur Keller stated Council Members Burt and Kou were qualified to serve 
as Vice Mayor.  He did not support Council Member Cormack because she 
did not appropriately represent the City at a regional body meeting. 
Rebecca Eisenberg supported Council Member Cormack for Vice Mayor 
because of her training and leadership.  Council Member Kou's positions on 
the Foothills Park settlement and housing were not right for this time.  
Council Member Burt did not support women and people of color and lacked 
integrity and respect for others.   
Terry Holzemer supported Council Member Kou for Vice Mayor because of 
her service to the community and her core beliefs. 
Valerie Stinger indicated the three Council Members were qualified to serve 
as Vice Mayor; however, Council Member Cormack included everyone in 
resolving issues and promoted the community's values. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 7 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 01/04/2021 
Aram James remarked that Council Member Cormack was always prepared, 
but she was not interested in different perspectives.  Council Member Burt 
was experienced but dismissive of women and people of color.  While he 
disagreed with some of Council Member Kou's past positions and 
statements, City leadership needed her diversity and community service.   
NOMINATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER BURT FAILED: 3-4 Cormack, 
Filseth, Kou, Tanaka no 
NOMINATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER KOU FAILED: 2-5 Burt, Cormack, 
DuBois, Filseth, Stone no 
NOMINATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER CORMACK FAILED: 2-5 Burt, 
DuBois, Kou, Stone, Tanaka no 
SECOND ROUND OF VOTING DUE TO NO CANDIDATE MAJORITY VOTE  
NOMINATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER BURT PASSED: 4-3 Cormack, 
Kou, Tanaka no  
NOMINATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER KOU FAILED: 2-5 Burt, Cormack, 
DuBois, Filseth, Stone no 
NOMINATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER CORMACK FAILED: 1-6 Burt, 
DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka no 
4. 
Resolution 9935 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Expressing Appreciation for Outstanding Public Service to Adrian 
Fine as Mayor and Council Member.” 
Council Member Cormack read the Resolution into the record. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked that Former Mayor Fine knew the 
community well and always tried to make the community better.  He 
thanked Former Mayor Fine for his service and all he did for the City and the 
Council. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated Former Mayor Fine's bravery and 
ability to compromise.   
Liz Kniss commented that Former Mayor Fine was a reminder of young 
families who could not afford to live in Palo Alto.  In addition, he was a 
terrific leader. 
Mayor DuBois appreciated Former Mayor Fine's dedication, advocacy, and 
public service. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 7 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 01/04/2021 
Supervisor Joe Simitian thanked Former Mayor Fine and Former Council 
Member Kniss for their service and noted the Santa Clara County Board of 
Supervisors passed Resolutions thanking them for their service.  He 
emphasized Former Council Member Kniss' dedication to understanding the 
views and values of her constituents.   
Rebecca Eisenberg advised that Former Mayor Fine considered the feelings 
of others and was respectful to everyone.  She appreciated his courage and 
integrity. 
Senator Josh Becker thanked Former Mayor Fine for his service and looked 
forward to working with him in the future.  Former Council Member Kniss 
was always helpful and supportive.   
Assembly Member Marc Berman thanked Former Mayor Fine for being a 
staunch pro-resident elected official and admired his moral compass and 
willingness to fight for his beliefs.   
Mike Alcheck recalled Former Mayor Fine making a big impact as a member 
of the Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC).  As a Council 
Member, he was patient, sensitive, professional, dedicated, compassionate, 
considerate, and honest.   
Margaret Abe-Koga, Mountain View Council Member, looked forward to 
working with the Council and appreciated Former Mayor Fine's leadership 
and courage.  Former Council Member Kniss served the community and 
region with passion and commitment for 35 years. 
Raven Malone expressed gratitude for being a resident while Former Mayor 
Fine and Former Council Member Kniss served.  Former Mayor Fine handled 
himself well in the face of criticism.  Former Council Member Kniss was 
committed to the community. 
Aram James hoped Mayor DuBois supported safe parking for homeless 
people and released a report on Zach Perron.  He wished Former Mayor Fine 
and Former Council Member Kniss well in the future. 
MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to 
adopt the Resolution expressing appreciation for outstanding public service 
to Adrian Fine as 2020 Mayor and Council Member. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Adrian Fine thanked the Council for the Resolution and everyone for their 
kind words.  Palo Alto's future needed to be family friendly, diverse, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 7 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 01/04/2021 
inclusive, and economically vibrant.  He was proud of the community's 
response to COVID-19.  He was grateful for City Staff's work in 2020.   
5. 
Resolution 9936 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Expressing Appreciation for Outstanding Public Service to Liz Kniss 
as Council Member and Mayor.” 
Council Member Filseth read the Resolution into the record.   
Council Member Tanaka advised that he learned a great deal from Former 
Council Member Kniss, who worked diplomatically and tirelessly on behalf of 
the community.   
Council Member Cormack thanked Former Council Member Kniss for showing 
everyone the many ways a woman could lead and advocate.  She always 
emphasized public health. 
Adrian Fine thanked Former Council Member Kniss for an inordinate amount 
of community service and for advocating for the betterment of the 
community.   
Vice Mayor Burt emphasized Former Council Member Kniss' 35 years of 
serving the community.   
Council Member Stone thanked Former Council Member Kniss for her service 
to the City of Palo Alto and commitment to public health. 
Mayor DuBois remarked that the Resolution reflected Former Council 
Member Kniss' lifetime of community service.   
Assembly Member Berman stated that wise elected officials followed Former 
Council Member Kniss' example of service and leadership.  He appreciated 
her sharing her vast knowledge with him, and that knowledge served him 
well in the California State Assembly.   
Betsy Bechtel concurred with prior comments regarding Former Council 
Member Kniss and emphasized her work on regional bodies, COVID-19, and 
affordable housing.   
Nancy Shepherd recalled Former Council Member Kniss' service as Vice 
Mayor in 2014.  She wished both Former Mayor Fine and Former Council 
Member Kniss well. 
Nicolas Hargis, Field Representative for Congresswoman Eshoo, thanked 
Former Mayor Fine and Former Council Member Kniss for their dedicated 
leadership.  He thanked the Council for its leadership in these trying times. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 7 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 01/04/2021 
Sheryl Klein appreciated Former Council Member Kniss' dedication to 
diversity and affordable housing.   
Mike Alcheck thanked Former Council Member Kniss for inspiring him and his 
family, investing in the community, and advocating progressive ideas.   
Kathy Torgerson noted Former Council Member Kniss' advocacy for 
progressive ideas. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth to 
adopt the Resolution expressing appreciation for outstanding public service 
to Liz Kniss as Council Member.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Liz Kniss appreciated the memories of her service to the community.  She 
urged the Council to consider balance in its deliberations because leading the 
City over the next few years was going to be a major undertaking.   
Oral Communications 
Aram James shared his priorities for the Council in 2021, including 
homelessness, cover ups, and Tasers. 
Rebecca Eisenberg reminded Council Members of their campaign promises 
and urged the Council to consider campaign finance limits.   
Jill O’Nan advised that there were no handicapped parking spaces at the 
front of Foothills Park and that people of color were being turned away from 
Foothills Park.  She asked the Council to close Foothills Park and allow the 
citizens to decide its fate. 
Irina concurred with Ms. O'Nan's comments.  The Council needed to ensure 
that investments in Foothills Park were recouped.  Visitors were causing 
environmental damage to the park. 
Jeremy Erman questioned whether the Council reinstated funding for KZSU 
and other programs. 
Adjournment: The meeting was adjourned at 8:23 P.M. 
