       
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
City Council  
Special Meeting 
August 9, 2021 
5:00 PM 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual teleconference at 
5:00 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
None. 
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH LABOR NEGOTIATORS 
City Designated Representatives: City Manager and his designees Pursuant to 
Merit System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada, Rumi Portillo, Molly Stump, 
Kiely Nose, Bob Jonsen, Geo Blackshire,            Dean Batchelor, Nick Raisch) 
Employee Organizations: Service Employees International Union, (SEIU) 
Local 521; Service Employees International Union, (SEIU) Local 521, Hourly 
Unit; Palo Alto Police Officers Association (PAPOA); Palo Alto Fire Chiefs’ 
Association (FCA) and Employee Organization: International Association of 
Fire Fighters (IAFF), Local 1319; Palo Alto Police Manager’s Association 
(PAPMA); Utilities Management and Professional Association of Palo Alto 
(UMPAPA); 
Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6(a). 
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack 
to adjourn to Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council adjourned to Closed Session at 5:04 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:25 P.M. 
Mayor DuBois announced no reportable action. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor DuBois advised that Agenda Item Number 15 was going to be heard prior to 
Agenda Item Number 11, and Agenda Item Number 13 may be heard at 9:00 P.M. 
Oral Communications 
Keith Bennett stated the City should not allow dewatering during droughts and 
requested the Council enact new regulations requiring recharge of all groundwater 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 2 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
pumped for construction dewatering during periods of requested and mandated 
water conservation.   
David Coale discussed the United Nations' report on climate change.  If the Council 
did not act, the City was not going to attain its climate action goals.  He wanted the 
Council to seek exemptions from California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) 
requirements so that meaningful actions were possible prior to December 2022. 
Jimmy Apffel, Bloom Energy, invited the public to participate in the inaugural Stars 
and Strides community run to support frontline hospital workers and their patients.   
Stacey Ashlund looked forward to a Council discussion of a Safe Firearms Storage 
Ordinance, which the Council directed Staff to draft in December 2020. 
Debby Mytels commented that electricity supply, transportation, buildings, and 
industrial emissions were the main causes of greenhouse gases (GHG).  The Fossil-
Free Buildings Coalition offered an ambassador program to assist residents with 
switching from gas to electric appliances.   
Michael Elliott, Valley Medical Center Foundation Executive Director, indicated the 
Stars and Strides run was intended to raise funds to support COVID-19 response 
efforts.  He encouraged the public to participate in the event. 
Chris Robell referred to social media posts regarding removal of a protected tree at 
2470 Bryant and inquired about plans to hire a City Arborist.  He hoped the Council 
was considering low-cost and no-cost actions to address climate change.   
Council took a break at 6:45 P.M. and returned at 6:55 P.M. 
Minutes Approval 
2. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the June 14, 21 and 22, 2021 City Council 
Meetings. 
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to 
approve the Action Minutes for the June 14, 21 and 22, 2021 City Council Meetings. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 5. 
Council Member Cormack registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 10. 
Council Member Tanaka registered no votes on Agenda Item Numbers 3, 4, and 6. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Burt, third by 
Council Member Tanaka to pull Agenda Item Number 5 to be heard on a date 
uncertain. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 3 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
Grace Mah, Stevenson House President, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, 
requested the Council require Move Mountain View to determine whether 
participants were violent felons, sexual offenders, or child molesters to ensure the 
safety of people visiting, working, and residing in the area. 
Xiuqun Wu with the aid of a translator addressed Agenda Item Number 5.  She 
requested background checks for participants in the Safe Parking Program for the 
safety of Stevenson House residents.  Her neighbor was interested in learning 
whether program participants were going to utilize restrooms at Stevenson House 
and going to be long-term residents at the parking lot. 
Shujjuan Han with the aid of a translator addressed Agenda Item Number 5.  She 
supported the program as long as background checks were performed on 
participants.  Stevenson House residents often left their windows open and were 
concerned about safety. 
Lifu Yan with the aid of a translator addressed Agenda Item Number 5.  He 
concurred with Ms. Han's comments and inquired regarding the possibility of closing 
the bridge between Stevenson House and the parking lot nightly.   
Lien Tsang with the aid of a translator addressed Agenda Item Number 5.  He did 
not support the Safe Parking Program because no one was going to regulate 
participants.  He expressed concern that participants may not be vaccinated and 
may not comply with masking protocols while on Stevenson House property. 
Michael Slack, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, supported security background 
checks for Safe Parking Program participants.   
Eva Lang, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, concurred with conducting 
background checks for program participants.  The church hosting the program 
operated a homeless shelter for more than 20 years, which seemed to indicate that 
the organization had a good record for running programs for the homeless.   
Micki Cooley, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, noted that the Safe Parking 
Program location was surrounded by schools, Magical Bridge and Mitchell Park, and 
Stevenson House.  Background checks for program participants would ensure the 
safety of participants and the community.   
Jill Harris, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, indicated that background checks for 
Safe Parking Program participants would provide some security for residents of 
Stevenson House. 
Terry Prater, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, supported background checks of 
program participants as an important safety measure.   
Linda Henigin, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, expressed concern that public 
speakers assumed program participants may be dangerous.  Move Mountain View 
staff were going to supervise participants, and participants were not going to be 
present when children commuted to schools.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 4 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
Hamilton Hitchings, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, noted that many programs 
screened participants to ensure they were not registered sex offenders or recent 
violent felons.  Allegations that background checks violated fair employment and 
housing laws and were costly were not true.  A requirement for participants to self-
report criminal history was not effective.   
Christopher Kan, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, Unitarian Universalist Church 
Safe Parking Program Chair, urged the Council to approve the permit as Staff 
recommended.  The program's safety plan met or exceeded recommendations and 
included checks to learn if participants were on parole or probation and legally 
allowed to reside in the parking lot.  The church agreed to provide a 24-hour 
hotline, coordinate with the Palo Alto Police Department, and hire security.  The 
program improved safety by helping the needy obtain permanent housing.  
Background checks were highly detrimental to people of color.   
Kevin Ma, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, asked the Council to approve the 
permit.  The Safe Parking Ordinance required the operator to participate in the 
County of Santa Clara (County) program, and the County program's policy 
discouraged background checks.  Without the Safe Parking Program, potential 
participants were living on streets in the area. 
Weijia Cheng, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, supported approval of a permit 
for the Safe Parking Program.  Safe parking programs were both safe and effective.   
Angie Evans, Palo Alto Forward, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, supported the 
Safe Parking Program and Staff's recommendation to deny the appeal.  The Santa 
Monica program was a model for programs across the country and did not 
recommend background checks.   
Kelsey Banes, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, understood people's concerns 
about safety; however, potential participants were members of the community and 
needed a safe place to live and connect with services.  A background check was a 
barrier to services. 
Brooke Bishara, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, Unitarian Universalist Church 
Board of Trustees President, reported two shelters were housed on the church 
campus, and no incidents had occurred.  The Safe Parking Program was going to 
improve the safety of all residents.  The church would not support the program if it 
felt the program was a safety concern for Stevenson House residents and 
congregants.   
Edie Keating, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, hoped the Council denied the 
appeal and allowed the church to add four parking spaces.  Requiring a background 
check sounded reasonable, but a requirement led to other issues.  The good 
judgment of trained case workers was more valuable than a background check.   
Elizabeth Ratner, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, League of Women Voters, 
supported denial of the appeal.  Background checks weakened protections for 
unhoused neighbors and the neighborhood.  Absent evidence that established 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 5 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
intake procedures reduced the safety of residents and neighbors, the appeal needed 
to be denied.   
Chuck Jagoda, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, believed the issue of 
background checks was complicated, and many homeless people also supported 
background checks. 
Kat Snyder , addressing Agenda Item Number 5, urged the Council to deny the 
appeal.  Not everyone with a criminal history was a safety concern or violent.   
Dave Joki, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, remarked that characterizing vehicle 
dwellers as dangerous was unfair. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved to approve Agenda Item Numbers 3 through 4 and 
6 through 10. 
3. 
Approval of a Design-Build Contract With INDECT USA CORPORATION in the 
Amount of $2,241,310; and Authorization for the City Manager to Negotiate 
and Execute Change Orders up to a Not-to-Exceed Amount of $224,131 for 
the Downtown Automated Parking Guidance System Design-Build Project, 
Capital Improvement Program Project PL-15002. 
4. 
Approve an Agreement Between the City of Palo Alto and the City of East 
Palo Alto for a Limited Emergency Water Supply Intertie. 
5. 
QUASI-JUDICIAL. 505 E Charleston Road [21PLN-00068]: Appeal of 
Director's Approval of a Safe Parking Permit Application. Approved by the 
Director of Planning and Development Services on May 12, 2021. 
Environmental Assessment: Exempt per CEQA Guidelines Section 15301 
(Existing Facilities). Zoning District: Single-Family Residential (R-1). 
6. 
Adoption of Resolution 9978 Establishing Fiscal Year (FY) 2022 Secured and 
Unsecured Property Tax Levy for the City of Palo Alto’s General Obligation 
Bond Indebtedness (2008 Measure N - Library General Obligation Bonds). 
7. 
Endorse and Authorize the Mayor to Sign a Joint Letter to the Valley 
Transportation Authority (VTA) From the Cities of Mountain View, Palo Alto, 
and Sunnyvale Recommending a Measure B Funding Allocation for Grade 
Separations. 
8. 
Adoption of Resolution 9979 Vacating Public Utility Easement at 3500 Louis 
Road. 
9. 
Approve the Housing Element Working Group Alternate Replacement and 
Modify Protocols for Participation for Alternates During Working Group 
Meetings. 
10. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of Ordinance 5529 Establishing Board and 
Commission Term Limits, Consolidating Appointments to April of Each Year, 
and Codifying the Human Relations Commission's Existing Role of 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 6 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
Recommending Grant Funding (FIRST READING: June 21, 2021 PASSED: 6-1 
Cormack no). 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 3, 4, 6:  6-1 Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEMS NUMBER 7-9:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 10:  6-1 Cormack no 
Council Member Cormack was not comfortable with a term limit of nine years. 
Council Member Tanaka supported installation of a parking guidance system, but 
the contract contained two total amounts, and the cost per space was more than 
double the typical cost.  Given the economic times and the receipt of only one bid, 
the City needed to be cautious.  Agenda Item Numbers 4 and 6 should have been 
Action Items.   
City Manager Comments 
City Manager Ed Shikada reported masks were required indoors regardless of an 
individual's vaccination status.  The delta variant of COVID-19 continued to impact 
healthcare capacity.  COVID-19 testing was scheduled for August 23, 2021, and 
information about testing and vaccination sites was available at sccfreevax.org and 
cityofpaloalto.org/testing.  An informational report in the Council packet contained 
updates regarding activities in July 2021.  City services were available to the public 
through in-person appointments at City Hall and phone and online appointments.  
Phased reopening of all Library branches was underway.  The next meeting of the 
Housing Element Working Group was scheduled for August 10, 2021.  Staff planned 
to meet with County of Santa Clara (County) Staff to learn about the study that 
found high lead emissions from airplanes.  The City of East Palo Alto was made 
aware of the issue.  The Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) Ad Hoc 
Committee was scheduled to meet on August 12, 2021 and the second Thursday of 
each month through December 2021.  The Black Index exhibit at the Palo Alto Art 
Center was going to close on August 14, 2021.  The Twilight Concert Series 
continued on August 14 and 21, 2021.  Upcoming Council Agenda Items included a 
workplan for a potential Business Tax ballot measure, grade separation 
alternatives, Foothills fire mitigation strategies, Residential Preferential Parking 
(RPP) management and fees, objective standards for affordable housing, a Study 
Session with the Independent Police Auditor (IPA), and economic development. 
Vice Mayor Burt requested the City Manager comment regarding Agenda Item 
Number 7. 
Mr. Shikada advised that the agreement formalized division of Measure B funding 
allocated to grade separations.  The City was going to receive 50 percent of $700 
million allocated to grade separations in North County.  Chief Transportation Official 
Philip Kamhi and Transportation Staff worked with the Santa Clara Valley 
Transportation Authority (VTA) and the cities of Mountain View and Sunnyvale to 
accomplish the agreement.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 7 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
Action Items 
15. 
Approval of the Appointment of Gayathri Kanth as Director of Libraries and 
Darren Numoto Director of Information Technology/Chief Information Officer. 
City Manager Ed Shikada reported the Council confirmed Department Director 
appointments.  The Library and Information Technology (IT) Departments were 
unique and extraordinary.  Recruitments for the positions began prior to the 
pandemic and were placed on hold during the pandemic.   
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth to approve 
the appointments of Gayathri Kanth as Director, Libraries; and Darren Numoto as 
Director, Information Technology/Chief Information Officer. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the salaries for each person prior to their 
appointments and for the prior Directors. 
Human Resources Director Rumi Portillo indicated their salaries were going to be 
approximately 7 percent more than their salaries as Interim Directors.  She agreed 
to provide precise amounts for Ms. Kanth, Mr. Numoto, and prior Directors. 
MOTION PASSED/FAILED:  6-0-1 Tanaka Abstain 
Mayor DuBois congratulated Ms. Kanth and Mr. Numoto on their appointments. 
Acting Director of Libraries Gayathri Kanth thanked the Council for the opportunity 
to serve as Director of Palo Alto Libraries.  Library Staff's passionate and 
professional attitude made working with them a joy.  The Friends of the Palo Alto 
Library supported the Library for many years.  The community's support and high 
expectations attracted her to Palo Alto and inspired her to continue improving 
services.  Thirty years ago, Libraries provided her with resources and a welcoming 
space that inspired her to become a librarian. 
Acting Director of Information Technology/Chief Information Officer Darren Numoto 
expressed his appreciation for the opportunity to serve as Director of IT and for the 
diversity of the Bay Area.  Serving as IT Director was an honor in light of Palo Alto 
being the birthplace of Silicon Valley.  IT Staff collaborated and transitioned City 
systems to remote work within a week of the start of the pandemic and to continue 
providing services to the community.  He committed to providing cost-effective, 
efficient, innovative, and secure technology solutions and to improve and 
streamline services.  He acknowledged the support of the Executive Leadership 
Team and IT colleagues.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 8 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
11. 
PUBLIC HEARING/PROPOSITION 218: Adoption of two Resolutions: 1) 
Adopting the Fiscal Year (FY) 2022 Wastewater Collection Utility Financial 
Plan and Amending the Wastewater Collection Utility Reserve Management 
Practices; 2) Amending Utility Rate Schedules  S-1 (Residential Wastewater 
Collection and Disposal), S-2 (Commercial Wastewater Collection and 
Disposal), S-6 (Restaurant Wastewater Collection and Disposal) and S-7 
(Commercial Wastewater Collection and Disposal – Industrial Discharger). 
Director of Utilities Dean Batchelor reviewed the Resolutions before the Council. 
Utility Rate Manager Eric Keniston reported a portion of the proposed 3 percent rate 
increase was going to fund an annual contribution to the Capital Improvement 
Program (CIP) Reserve.  Staff's alternative proposal of a 0 percent increase 
resulted in a $200,000 reduction in spending, and the Utilities Advisory Commission 
(UAC) and Finance Committee did not believe that was appropriate.  A Cost of 
Service Study revealed that residential customers' contribution to wastewater 
outflow had increased.  Consequently, wastewater rates increased 4.7 percent for 
residential customers and 1.5 percent for commercial customers and decreased 2.1 
percent for restaurant customers.  Future projections included a 3 percent rate 
increase in fiscal year (FY) 2023 and annual 5 percent increases in FY 2024, 2025, 
and 2026.  Charges for commercial customers were based on usage, and the 
minimum charge was eliminated.   
City Attorney Molly Stump advised that the public hearing was governed by 
Proposition 218.  A notice of the hearing was mailed to effected wastewater 
customers on June 16, 2021, and the City Clerk accepted any written protests to 
the proposed rates.  At the close of public comment, the City Clerk was going to 
cease accepting protests.  Protests had to be written and received by the City Clerk.  
Customers wishing to submit a written protest needed to indicate their desire via 
Zoom to the City Clerk, who was going to provide instructions for submitting a 
written protest.  At the end of the protest period, the City Clerk intended to count 
protests.  If a majority of affected customers submitted protests, the Council was 
not allowed to impose a new rate.  Otherwise, the Council was allowed to discuss 
and adopt the proposed wastewater rates. 
Public Hearing opened at 8:16 P.M. and closed at 8:17 P.M. with no public 
comment. 
City Clerk Lesley Milton reported receipt of one written protest prior to the meeting, 
and it was included in the Agenda packet. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to: 
A. 
Adopt a Resolution approving: 
a. The Fiscal Year (FY) 2022 Wastewater Collection Utility Financial Plan; 
b. Up to a $2.2 million transfer from the Operations to the Capital 
Improvements Projects Reserve in FY 2021; 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 9 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
c. Up to a $4.35 million capital program contribution from the Operations 
to the Capital Improvements Projects Reserve in FY 2022; 
d. Amendments 
to 
the 
Wastewater 
Collection 
Utility 
Reserves 
Management Practices; and 
B. 
Adopt a Resolution approving adjustments to Wastewater Collection Utility 
Rates via the Amendment of Wastewater Collection and Disposal Rate 
Schedules: 
a. 
S-1 (Residential Wastewater Collection and Disposal), S-2 (Commercial 
Wastewater Collection and Disposal), S-6 (Restaurant Wastewater 
Collection and Disposal) and S-7 (Commercial Wastewater Collection 
and Disposal – Industrial Discharger). 
Council Member Cormack noted that the Finance Committee discussed proposed 
rate increases in detail and determined rate increases were the appropriate method 
to fund rising costs. 
Council Member Kou requested the number of written protests that constituted a 
majority of customers.   
Ms. Stump explained that 22,279 property owners and customers were subject to 
the rate changes.  Written protests by 11,140 prevented the Council from 
considering rate changes. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether industrial customers leaving the system 
resulted in the rate increase for residential customers. 
Mr. Keniston clarified that some of the industrial customers scaled back or changed 
operations.  Water usage was shifting from industrial customers to smaller 
commercial customers.  Industrial customers were utilizing more water for irrigation 
than industrial processes, and irrigation usage did not affect wastewater.   
Council Member Kou asked if commercial customers' charges exceeded the 
minimum in the past. 
Mr. Keniston responded no.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Staff Report compared Palo Alto's rates to 
other cities' rates. 
Mr. Keniston shared a table of comparisons and noted the table was prepared 
subsequent to submission of the Staff Report. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about a comparison of rates for commercial 
customers. 
Mr. Keniston referred to Slide 13 of the presentation.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 10 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
Council Member Tanaka remarked that the tables were not provided to the Council.   
Mr. Keniston indicated that the table for commercial customers was contained in 
the Financial Plan.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if Los Altos was a partner in the Regional Water 
Quality Control Plant (RWQCP). 
Mr. Keniston answered yes. 
Council Member Tanaka requested an explanation of the difference in Palo Alto's 
and Los Altos' wastewater nonresidential bills. 
Resource Planner Lisa Bilir advised that Los Altos utilized reserve funds to pay for 
capital costs through FY 2024.  Comparing rates among cities was difficult because 
customer types and customers were different in each city.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the rationale for not comparing Palo Alto's rates 
with the other RWQCP partners. 
Ms. Bilir explained that the cities in the table were the usual cities selected for 
comparison.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the names of the remaining RWQCP partners 
and the commercial rates for those cities. 
Mr. Keniston answered Los Altos Hills, East Palo Alto, and Stanford.  He did not 
have the commercial rates for the three cities.  Staff would provide the rates 
shortly. 
Vice Mayor Burt noted that the Staff Report contained links to Staff Reports 
presented to the Finance Committee, and all Council Members received those 
reports at the time of the Finance Committee meeting.  The Staff Report for 
wastewater collection contained almost all of the information Council Member 
Tanaka requested.  Residential rates for the partner cities were similar.  Palo Alto's 
rates were on the low end of the range of rates.  Rates for Menlo Park and Redwood 
City were almost twice Palo Alto's rates.  The RWQCP provided favorable, 
competitive rates.  Investments in the RWQCP were prudent.  Los Altos' commercial 
sector was very small, and focusing on Los Altos' rates as a point of comparison 
was not relevant.   
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
12. 
Review of South Palo Alto Bikeways Phase 1 Community Feedback and 
Concept Plan Alternatives, and Approve Preferred Concept Plan. 
Chief Transportation Official Philip Kamhi advised that the recommended Preferred 
Concept Plan was developed and modified through input from the community and 
Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC).  Staff believed the Santa Clara 
Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) was likely to modify the grant agreement to 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 11 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
match the plan design.  The plan did not include removal of a parking lane in 
Segment 4 of East Meadow Drive.   
Manager of Transportation Planning Sylvia Star-Lack reported the City received a 
$919,000 grant to improve bicycle facilities on the Waverley multiuse path, Fabian 
Way, and East Meadow Drive.  The understanding with VTA required the City to 
deliver a protected bikeway along Fabian Way or East Meadow Drive and a facility 
that was a protected bikeway along some segments of the corridor and a buffered 
bikeway without vertical separations along the remaining segments.  The grant 
required Caltrans' approval of the project such that construction began by January 
2023.  The three corridors were key routes for school commutes and connections to 
various community facilities.  The number of students biking to Stanford Middle 
School increased from 48 percent in 2009 to 70 percent in 2019.  The number of 
students biking to Gunn High School increased from 33 percent in 2009 to 50 
percent in 2019.  Later start times for secondary schools beginning in the fall of 
2021 were likely to result in even higher rates of biking and walking.  A 2020 
survey of Palo Alto Unified School District (PAUSD) parents revealed that a lack of 
protected bikeways was the main reason elementary school parents did not allow 
their children to bike to school.  Projects such as the South Palo Alto Bikeways 
Project supported mode shifts from vehicles to active forms of travel and were a 
relatively low-cost and efficient strategy to help reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions and barriers to bicycling.  The Waverley multiuse path's existing 
conditions combined with high demand during school peak periods led to falls and 
collisions for students.  Existing bicycle facilities made Fabian Way a difficult school 
commute route probably due to large crossing distances, traffic volumes and 
speeds, and lack of separation from vehicle traffic.  East Meadow Drive was a 
popular school commute corridor and provided one travel lane, one bike lane, and 
one non-standard-width parking lane in each direction.  East Meadow Drive's 
existing conditions exposed bicyclists to dooring risks, and obstruction of bike lanes 
caused bicyclists to utilize sidewalks.   
Steve Davis, Fehr & Peers, reviewed the engagement period of April 28 to July 14, 
methods of engagement, and themes contained in public comments.  The preferred 
alternative for the Waverley multiuse path was widening the path where feasible.  
The design had the potential to provide the greatest enhancement to users' 
experiences while minimizing effects on trees.  Based on feedback, Staff intended 
to explore a continuous, rigid barrier to replace the existing fence.  The preferred 
alternative for Fabian Way included a reduction in travel lanes and maintenance of 
on-street parking as part of a parking-protected bikeway in the eastbound 
direction.  Improvements for the segment could be coordinated with improvement 
programs from the Charleston-Arastradero project.  East Meadow Drive was divided 
into four segments for the identification of a preferred alternative.  The preferred 
alternative for Location 3 included a buffered bike lane along the residential side of 
the roadway, widening the on-street parking lane, and a protected bikeway along 
the school side of the roadway.  The preferred design for Location 4 included 
reducing the width of travel lanes and applying visibility treatments to the bike 
lane. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 12 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
Ms. Star-Lack advised that with Council approval, Staff planned to release a 
Request for Proposals (RFP) for design, conduct additional community engagement 
and parking and traffic studies, and implement temporary treatments.   
Scott O'Neil, speaking on behalf of Gail Price, Sean Hyatt Holman, Yekaterina 
O'Neil, Yulia O'Neil, and Kirill O'Neil, supported the project with full protected bike 
lanes along East Meadow and expressed concerns about street sweeping and 
bollards in Location 1 of East Meadow and parking. 
Keri Wagner remarked that the project was going to reassure parents about 
allowing their children to bike to school and was good for the community.  She 
asked the Council to support the PTC's proposal. 
Arnout Boelens, speaking as an individual, urged the Council to move forward with 
the project.  The project provided alternatives to driving.  Protected bike lanes on 
Fabian Way provided a connection to the new Bike Bridge.  The Waverley multiuse 
path was in desperate need of improvements.  Students and their parents were 
essential stakeholders in the project, but no Parent Teacher Association (PTA) 
meetings were scheduled over the summer.   
Sue Freeman commented that many residents along East Meadow and nearby 
streets were not aware of community meetings for the project.  She supported the 
retention of parking on East Meadow Location 4 and the use of stencils on the bike 
path.   
Kenneth Fehl noted that traffic calming was not discussed previously.  Reducing 
lane widths was acceptable, but installing obstacles that increased emergency 
response times was not acceptable.  The roundabout needed to be removed and 
the bike lanes restored.  He appreciated the plan to retain on-street parking in 
Location 4. 
Robert Neff indicated that improvements to the Waverley bike path were needed.  
Fabian Way was long overdue for improvements.  He suggested Staff improve the 
pedestrian crossing on Fabian Way and consider additional crossings.  Back-in 
parking was safer than angle parking.   
Katie Rueff supported the preferred alternative because it increased safety for 
bicyclists, encouraged active transportation, and reduced carbon emissions.   
Penny Ellson asked the Council to support the Staff recommendation.  The 
Waverley path was substandard and hazardous.  The intersection of the path with 
East Meadow needed some adjustments.  Staff did not eliminate the risk of dooring 
in Segment 4.  Bike volumes on Fabian Way were low due to the terrible 
environment for biking.  Fabian was an excellent candidate for a road diet and 
protected bike lanes. 
Patricia Stayte remarked that East Meadow residents only recently learned about 
the project.  Many stakeholders were probably not aware of the project or unable to 
attend meetings.  The survey excluded whole groups of citizens and contained 
sampling bias.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 13 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
Alan Wachtel, speaking as an individual, urged the Council not to approve the plan 
because it was bad for bicycle safety.  Lane reconfiguration, removal of some 
parking, and conventional bike lanes were easy and quick to implement.  The so-
called protected bikeways created new right-turn conflicts at every intersection and 
driveway.   
Debra Goldeen supported the Staff recommendation.  If parking was retained in 
Segment 4, squeezes and speed bumps were needed to reduce vehicle speed.  
Back-in parking was imperative.   
Kelsey Banes encouraged the Council to support the plan.  Roadways such as 
Fabian were not good for bicyclists.  People needed to feel safe when biking. 
Angie Evans, Palo Alto Forward, supported the Staff recommendation.  Protected 
bike lanes were a commitment to reduce traffic and GHG emissions.  Protected bike 
lanes were necessary for the safety of bicyclists.   
Kevin Ma supported the project.  Green paint was not as safe as protected bike 
lanes.  Grant funding was necessary to begin the project. 
Council Member Cormack requested the number of accidents that occurred at the 
East Meadow roundabout between 2015 and 2020. 
Mr. Kamhi advised that specific locations of accidents were not available.   
Council Member Cormack requested photos of buffered and protected bike lanes 
and asked if bollards, concrete barriers, and landscaped barriers were utilized in 
Phases I and II of the Charleston-Arastradero Project. 
Ms. Star-Lack indicated concrete barriers, landscaped barriers, and parking were 
utilized in the Charleston-Arastradero Project. 
Council Member Cormack asked if traffic calming involved reducing the width of the 
roadway or something more.   
Mr. Kamhi explained that traffic calming was the use of physical design and other 
measures to improve the safety of all modes of transportation.  Proposed traffic 
calming measures were reducing the width of one lane by 1 foot and applying green 
paint at intersections and bike lane stencils. 
Council Member Cormack wholeheartedly supported the use of green paint.  She 
inquired about community engagement for the connection to the Bike Bridge. 
Mr. Kamhi remarked that the connection to the Bike Bridge was not a component of 
the project, but it was related to the project.  Information about access to the Bike 
Bridge was not dependent on the South Palo Alto Bikeways Project. 
Vice Mayor Burt commented that the project was an important connection in the 
bicycle network and to job centers and destinations.  The project improved the 
safety and ease of bicycling.  Traffic calming was intended to reduce traffic speeds 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 14 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
to the speed limit, not below it.  Dooring and the Dutch reach needed to be 
included in bicycle education.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to approve the 
preferred concept plan for the following project segments: 
A. 
Waverley Multi-Use Path Alternative 2 Widen Towards Either Side; 
B. 
Fabian Way – Protected bicycle lanes on both sides; 
C. 
East Meadow Drive Segment 1 between East Meadow Circle and Fabian Way 
– Standard bicycle lanes on both sides; 
D. 
East Meadow Drive Segment 2 between Alma Street and Waverley Street – 
Protected bicycle lanes on both sides; 
E. 
East Meadow Drive Segment 3 between Waverley Street and Middlefield 
Road –Protected bicycle lane on one side with buffered bicycle lane on the 
other side; and 
F. 
East Meadow Drive Segment 4 between Middlefield Road and East Meadow 
Circle –Traffic calming and bicycle lane visibility treatments, including travel 
lane width reduction from 11 to 10 feet. 
Mayor DuBois inquired about access to the Bike Bridge for people traveling along 
the south or east side of Fabian Way. 
Ms. Star-Lack advised that Staff continued to explore access to the Bike Bridge.   
Mayor DuBois asked Staff to use restraint in applying green paint to roadways and 
to provide block-by-block plans for the project in the future.  He inquired about 
temporary installation of treatments. 
Ms. Star-Lack indicated Staff wanted to utilize temporary treatments to 
demonstrate changes.   
Council Member Stone requested additional details regarding construction impacts 
on trees along the Waverley path. 
Ms. Star-Lack explained that Staff was exploring construction methods that might 
avoid impacting trees.   
Mr. Kamhi added that tree roots raised the path in some locations, and construction 
was likely to impact them. 
Council Member Stone inquired about drop-off and pickup at Stanford Middle School 
and Fairmeadow Elementary School. 
Ms. Star-Lack related that a protected bike lane adjacent to Stanford Middle School 
precluded drop-offs and pickups in front of the school.  The school's driveway, the 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 15 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
opposite side of the street, and the Mitchell Park driveway were available for drop-
offs and pickups.   
Council Member Stone asked if PAUSD provided input. 
Ms. Star-Lack indicated that PAUSD was aware of the project but had not provided 
comment. 
Mr. Kamhi added that PAUSD was an active partner in the grant and project. 
Council Member Stone supported the Motion because the project improved safety 
for students and reduced carbon emissions.   
Council Member Filseth supported the Motion and project. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the percentage of on-street parking proposed for 
removal.   
Mr. Kamhi clarified that the parking spaces were not striped.  An in-depth parking 
study would provide that type of information.  Staff was not proposing to remove 
parking in Segment 4. 
Council Member Tanaka requested parking occupancy in those segments.   
Ms. Star-Lack reported Staff did not conduct a parking occupancy study.  
Mr. Davis explained that the curb length of parking spaces considered for removal 
represented about 20 percent of the total curb length. 
Mr. Kamhi stated Staff did not believe parking was severely impacted. 
Council Member Tanaka expressed concern that bulbouts on Ross Road forced 
bicyclists into the vehicle lane of travel. 
Mr. Kamhi advised that Ross Road was not a component of the South Palo Alto 
Bikeways Project, and the project did not contain a roundabout. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if it was possible to place bike lanes traveling in 
opposite directions on the same side of the street and between the curb and a 
parking lane.  In this manner, eliminating the two 3-foot-wide lanes with bollards 
provided space for a parking lane on the opposite side of the street. 
Mr. Davis reported removing the buffer was not allowed.  Bike lanes in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts did not have buffers because they were constructed prior to 
implementation of standards requiring a buffer. 
Council Member Cormack noted that multiple levels of communications were 
beneficial for the community.  Data gathered during the pandemic was not 
determinative.  Parking on East Meadow near Ramos Park was intended for park 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 16 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
visitors, not residents.  Familiarity with proposed improvements was going to 
benefit the community. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council took a break at 9:54 P.M. and returned at 10:05 P.M. 
13. 
Adoption of a Resolution Endorsing the Santa Clara County Community Plan 
to End Homelessness 2020-25 and Discussion and Direction on Strategies for 
Services for Unhoused Palo Alto Residents, Including Direction Regarding 
Application for Project Homekey Program for an Emergency Shelter in a 
Portion of the Former Los Altos Treatment Plant (LATP) Site and Direction 
Related to Other Resources for Unhoused Palo Altans. 
Ray Bramson, Destination: Home Chief Operating Officer, described the Santa Clara 
County Community Plan to End Homelessness (Community Plan) and the continuum 
of care as a broad group of stakeholders dedicated to ending and preventing 
homelessness through community-wide efforts and effective programs.  Between 
2015 and 2019, the supportive housing system housed more than 14,000 people, 
doubled the number of supportive housing units and temporary housing and 
emergency shelter capacity in Santa Clara County.  The 2016 Measure A Affordable 
Housing Bond supported implementation of the Community Plan.  However, 
homelessness continued to grow due to a growing wealth gap, a shortage of 
affordable housing, and racial disparities. 
Katheryn Kaminski, Santa Clara County Office of Supportive Housing Deputy 
Director, shared the Community Plan's guiding values and core strategies to 
address the causes of homelessness, expand programs, and improve quality of life.  
Target goals included reducing the number of people who become homeless by 30 
percent, housing 20,000 people, expanding early interventions to serve 2,500 
people annually, and doubling temporary housing capacity, and addressing racial 
inequities.  Thus far, programs had connected more than 6,800 households to 
shelter, distributed rental and financial assistance to more than 15,500 families, 
connected 4,664 people to permanent housing, and provided five temporary 
housing communities.   
Jo Price, LifeMoves Vice President of Real Estate and Operations, advised that 
LifeMoves provided a bridge from homelessness to housing.  Project Homekey was 
temporary housing that provided units for single individuals, couples, and families, 
toilet and shower closets, laundry room, classroom, and offices for case 
management services.  Using the Los Altos Treatment Plant (LATP) site, Project 
Homekey could provide 100 to 180 doors, 100 percent of capital costs up to $10 
million, and 90 percent of capital costs up to $22 million.  Operational costs 
depended upon the size of the project but were estimated at $2.5 million to $4 
million per year.   
Manager of Human Services Minka van der Zwaag reported the City's support of 
organizations that serve the unhoused.  The City did not have a full-time, street-
based homeless outreach worker to build relationships with homeless people, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 17 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
provide services or connect individuals to services, train City Staff, and educate the 
community.  The cost for an outreach worker ranged from $75,000 and $200,000 
annually and depended on the scope of the worker's duties.   
City Manager Ed Shikada noted that Deputy City Manager Cotton Gaines was 
providing interim support for unhoused initiatives, but permanent support was 
needed.   
Assistant Police Chief Andrew Binder related the services and benefits provided by a 
special enforcement team.   
Angie Evans, Palo Alto Forward, supported the Council's endorsement of the 
Community Plan, a thoughtful discussion of a Permanent Safe Parking Ordinance, 
submission of a Project Homekey application, and hiring a qualified outreach 
worker. 
Owen Longstreth believed the Police Department did not have a role in homeless 
outreach and services.   
Mayor DuBois noted an at-places memorandum was provided to Council Members 
via email. 
Michaela concurred with Mr. Longstreth's comments.   
Rohin Ghosh, Palo Alto Renters Association, supported the Staff recommendation 
and opposed the creation of a special enforcement team.   
Bruce Gee supported Staff's recommendation as a way to improve quality of life for 
all.   
Hamilton Hitchings commented that the existing Safe Parking Program did not 
provide permanent onsite supervision of participants.  Allowing sexual offenders 
and recent violent felons to participate in a Safe Parking Program did not fulfill the 
requirement for a program not to adversely affect the safety, health, and welfare of 
persons residing or working in surrounding areas.   
Aram James noted that some criminal offenders did not reoffend and lived 
productive lives.  A special enforcement team was better served with highly trained 
case workers than police officers. 
Valerie Stinger supported Staff's strong proposal for services to the unhoused. 
Kelsey Banes urged the Council to support a plan to end homelessness and 
supported the hiring of an outreach worker.   
Elizabeth Ratner, League of Women Voters of Palo Alto, supported policies and 
programs that provided a decent home and suitable living environment for every 
American family.  She urged the Council to direct Staff to establish a public-private 
partnership for a supportive interim housing site in Palo Alto.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 18 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
Mary Beth Train supported the Staff recommendation. 
Roberta Ahlquist, Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, supported 
the Resolution, Community Plan, and a Business Tax and suggested the Council 
implement a rent stabilization plan. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if Staff intended to contract with a nonprofit for an outreach 
worker. 
Ms. van der Zwaag replied yes.   
Vice Mayor Burt requested clarification of staffing for a special enforcement team. 
Mr. Binder indicated two officers typically staffed a special enforcement team.  Staff 
could explore different deployment models to meet the Council's and community's 
goals. 
Mr. Shikada added that the enforcement team was likely to be staffed through 
overtime in the near term. 
Vice Mayor Burt inquired about funding for an outreach worker and the special 
enforcement team. 
Deputy City Manager Chantal Cotton Gaines reported the Budget Stabilization 
Reserve Fund (BSR) was a possible funding source.  Staff was exploring partnership 
opportunities to obtain the services of an outreach worker.   
Mr. Shikada noted that Staff sought general direction regarding areas of focus and 
priorities and planned to return with recommendations for implementation. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if hiring an outreach worker or creating a special 
enforcement team was possible given the City's financial constraints and, if so, 
which Staff recommended implementing first. 
Mr. Shikada related that Staff sought the Council's feedback to guide a 
recommendation. 
Council Member Filseth requested the source for the County of Santa Clara's 
(County) goal of housing 20,000 people. 
Ms. Kaminski explained that the County housed 14,000 people in a five-year period.  
A point-in-time count revealed 10,000 people experiencing homelessness.  Over 
time, more people were going to become homeless.  The target of housing 20,000 
people covered the 10,000 people from the point-in-time count and future 
homeless people.   
Council Member Filseth was impressed by the LifeMoves operation in Mountain View 
and LifeMoves' success in transitioning individuals from homelessness to housing.  
In the LifeMoves model, beds were the framework for providing services.  With the 
right model, the City could house its homeless population.  He noted challenges 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 19 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
with utilizing the LATP and inquired about an alternative housing site.  The City 
needed to invest in a special engagement team. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines agreed that Staff needed to research different aspects of 
programs for the homeless and sought Council's direction regarding next steps.  
Previously, the Council suggested a hotel or motel for use as temporary housing.  
Hotels/motels 
west 
of 
Highway 
101 
expressed 
some 
interest, 
but 
the 
Comprehensive Plan identified east of Highway 101 as the preferred area for a 
shelter.  LifeMoves preferred a one-acre site, but a smaller site was feasible.   
Council Member Filseth expressed interest in options east of Highway 101, but sites 
west of Highway 101 were acceptable.  He was interested in a LifeMoves project but 
not the LATP site. 
Ms. Price noted the limited time available to work out the details and submit an 
application to Project Homekey.  The cost of a hotel was $300,000 per door and did 
not include remodeling costs.  The LATP site was comparable to the Redwood City 
project site.   
Council Member Stone asked if Staff was aware of the number of persons who 
became homeless for every person who attained housing. 
Ms. Kaminski reported in 2020 approximately 80 households in Palo Alto were 
housed, approximately 150 households were assessed for the first time, and the 
total number of people assessed was about 260.   
Council Member Stone was excited by the prospect of providing housing through 
the LifeMoves model.  He inquired regarding the number of additional doors that 
could be built if the building height was increased. 
Ms. Price advised that the next stage included development of project details.  The 
exact number of beds had yet to be determined. 
Council Member Cormack supported the proposed Resolution.  Project Homekey 
provided funding to the City at no cost.  She asked if the LATP site accommodated 
the anticipated number of vehicles. 
Ms. Price indicated vehicles and parking were going to be explored with maximum 
onsite parking. 
Council Member Cormack expressed concern that the location of the LATP site was 
going to necessitate the use of vehicles.  She requested Staff comment on the 
displacement of current uses of the LATP site. 
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston reported Green Waste utilized space adjacent 
to the potential housing site.  Staging for construction of the Highway 101 Bike 
Bridge was occurring on the portion of the site being considered for housing. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 20 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
Council Member Cormack endorsed detailed review of the LATP site.  A permanent 
Safe Parking Ordinance was worthwhile and an important component of permanent 
housing.  She inquired about the layoff of sworn officers due to Budget cuts. 
Mr. Binder advised that no sworn officers were laid off, but attrition and 
resignations impacted the Police Department.  In the past, an enforcement team 
was deployed when minimum staffing needs were exceeded. 
Council Member Cormack noted that the Budget Uncertainty Reserve and Stanford 
University Medical Center (SUMC) were one-time funds, and ongoing funding was 
needed for outreach efforts.  One option for a Project Homekey project required a 
$2 million local match.  While some community members opposed the Police 
Department's involvement in outreach, there had been some significant problems.   
Council Member Kou inquired about methods used to encourage homeless 
individuals to move into housing. 
Ms. van der Zwaag reported that homeless individuals may not be ready for 
housing when housing was available.  Housing sometimes created anxiety in 
homeless individuals.  Fortunately, case workers persevered in their efforts. 
Brian Greenberg indicated interim supportive housing was useful in reassuring 
individuals and offering services as a first step toward housing. 
Council Member Kou requested clarification of the portion of the LATP site proposed 
for the Project Homekey project. 
Mr. Eggleston explained that the red area on the map provided to the Council was 
the proposed housing site.  Area B was the former treatment plant site and the 
potential site for a water purification facility.  Area B was potentially a buffer 
between the housing site and the natural area of the Baylands.   
Council Member Kou inquired about use of Measure A funds. 
Ms. Kaminski explained that Measure A funding was available for affordable housing 
for very-low- and low-income families and permanent supportive housing.   
Council Member Kou expressed interest in learning the cost per resident for City 
services.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the Ordinances being enforced against Palo 
Alto's homeless population. 
Mr. Binder advised that Police Officers considered many factors when deciding to 
enforce City Ordinances.  Police Officers utilized a compassionate approach and 
attempted to resolve issues without enforcement as a first step.  At times, 
enforcement was necessary.   
City Attorney Molly Stump clarified that all Ordinances and sections of the Penal 
Code were available for Police Officers' use where appropriate, unless a court had 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 21 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
invalidated them.  No section of the Municipal Code or the Penal Code was enforced 
perfectly.   
Council Member Tanaka questioned whether a revenue-generating use of the LATP 
site and funding homeless programs was more effective than constructing 
temporary housing. 
Mayor DuBois remarked that the Mountain View Homekey project was impressive.  
Perhaps, reconfiguring the LATP site was possible so that it could better 
accommodate the water purification plant, Green Waste, and housing.  Hopefully, 
the community would contribute funding for a Homekey project.  A site east of 
Highway 101 was preferable.  He wanted the Safe Parking Program to expand into 
private parking lots.  Background checks excluded people who needed housing, and 
requesting criminal history on the application was an expedient and gentle way to 
manage concerns.  A unified waiting list for affordable housing, more information 
about mental health program, and a partnership with the Veterans Administration 
(VA) Hospital would be helpful.  He wanted to understand funding and options for 
an outreach worker and a special enforcement team.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to: 
A. 
Support advancing an application for the Project Homekey Program for an 
emergency shelter in a portion of the Former Los Altos Treatment Plant 
(LATP) site with specific steps as follows: 
a. 
Pursue partnership with LifeMoves as the nonprofit partner; 
b. Pursue zoning changes necessary to allow for an emergency shelter at 
the LATP site; 
c. 
Direct Staff to identify funding sources and to include that information 
in the return report to the City Council;  
d. Return to City Council in September with sufficient time to make an 
application and include all application details, including the explanation 
of all costs; and 
B. 
Continue City Council discussion on the rest of this item to a date uncertain. 
Vice Mayor Burt noted that the Homekey project in Mountain View was exemplary.  
No site was perfect for a housing project, but issues could be resolved.  Perhaps the 
City could contribute land rather than money to a Homekey project.   
Council Member Kou requested an environmental review of the LATP site and 
suggested parties consider reconfiguring the site to better accommodate housing. 
Council Member Tanaka commented that a revenue-generating use of the LATP site 
could benefit the homeless population more than a housing project.  He suggested 
amending the Motion to include exploration of renting the LATP site and utilizing 
funding for homeless programs.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 22 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/09/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt indicated that interim housing was likely to reduce the demand for 
safe parking sites. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING 
MOTION PART A PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
MOTION PART B PASSED:  7-0 
14. 
Designation of Voting Delegate and Alternate for the Cal Cities 2021 Annual 
Conference to be Held September 22-24, 2021 in Sacramento. 
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Burt to approve 
Council Member Kou as the voting delegate and Vice Mayor Burt as alternate for the 
2021 Cal Cities Annual Conference to be held September 22-24, 2021 in 
Sacramento, CA. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack reported water restrictions were not mandated, but 
drought conditions were worsening. 
Mayor DuBois noted concerts were held in parks during July.  Emergency 
Preparedness Volunteers were needed.   
Council Member Kou advised that she attended the Local Policy Makers Group 
meeting.  Caltrain services were scheduled to increase on August 30, 2021. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 12:12 P.M. 
