CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 26 
Special Meeting 
February 8, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:02 P.M. 
Participating Remotely:  Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Study Session 
1. 
231 Grant Avenue: Request by Santa Clara County for a Study Session 
to Obtain City Council and Community Input on its Proposed Teacher 
Housing Project. Environmental Assessment:  Not Subject to the 
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Because no Action Will be 
Taken. The County Will Serve as the Lead Agency for the Project. The 
County Issued a Notice of Preparation of an Environmental Impact 
Report (EIR) for the Project on December 4, 2020. Zoning District: PF 
(Public Facilities). 
Mayor DuBois recused himself from this item due to owning real property near 
this location. He left the meeting at 5:07 P.M. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, noted the City 
earmarked $3 million for the project.  The project was exempt from local 
zoning standards; however, the project was fairly consistent with the City's 
workforce housing overlay.  The proposed height of the building was 
approximately 55 feet.  If the project was subject to local zoning standards, it 
was still a qualifying project under the Planned Housing Zone (PHZ).  The 
project was subject to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), but 
the Study Session was not.  The County of Santa Clara (County) began the 
environmental review process for the project, and the City submitted a 
comment letter.  City Staff found the project to be generally consistent with 
the Comprehensive Plan.   
Joe Simitian, Santa Clara County Supervisor, reported he first presented the 
concept to the Council in June 2018.  Facebook provided a $25 million grant.  
The County partnered with Abode Communities and Mercy Housing California.  
The County wished to obtain the Council's and the community's feedback on 
the project.  The project was a recruiting and retention tool for area schools.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Emily Chen, Senior Planner Santa Clara County, advised that the project was 
located on County-owned property within the City of Palo Alto.  The project 
was intended to provide housing for public employees and teachers.  The 
housing units generated by the project were going to count toward the City's 
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) numbers.  The County was 
preparing a Draft Environmental Impact Report (DEIR) and receiving 
comments.  The Final Environmental Impact Report (FEIR) was expected to 
be ready in the late summer or early fall of 2021.   
Maegan Pearson, Abode Communities Project Developer, indicated the 
proposed project was a 112,000-square-foot, four-story building with 110 
units.  Amenities included 2,000 square feet of community space, an onsite 
laundry, private courtyards, and onsite property management.  The project 
was intended to serve teacher and educator households that did not qualify 
for affordable housing and were unable to afford market-rate housing.  
Twenty-seven units were designated for households earning 60 percent area 
median income (AMI), 12 units for households earning 80 percent AMI, and 
70 units for households earning more than 90 percent AMI.  The project 
proposed 112 parking spaces, a controlled-access garage, at-grade double car 
stackers, 134 secured bike parking spaces, three public plazas along Grant 
Avenue, and 1,120 square feet of flex space.  The proposed building height 
was comparable to the heights of surrounding buildings.  The plazas were 
designed around existing trees.   
Sarah Chaffin, Community Engagement Planner, relayed that community 
engagement began in January 2021 with adjacent residents.  The 
231grant.org website was available to the public for information.  Plans for 
community outreach included study sessions, focus groups, community 
meetings, and listening sessions in February through April 2021 and an open 
house in May 2021.   
Ms. Pearson shared the project timeline with construction anticipated in 
August 2022 and completion in February 2024.   
Council Member Filseth requested clarification of criteria for tenants and the 
parking plan.   
Ms. Pearson explained that units were going to be allocated to each district 
participating in the project, and tenants were going to be selected through a 
lottery. 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether an employee was required to vacate 
the unit if they left the district's employ. 
Ms. Pearson advised that the policy was being developed. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Council Member Filseth asked if employees already living in Santa Clara 
County were eligible for units. 
Ms. Pearson reiterated that policies and regulations were being developed as 
were parking options such as carpooling. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if Facebook's grant meant the City's funding 
was no longer needed. 
Ms. Pearson answered no. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the City had the funding in reserve. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, responded yes. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the percentage of units designated for 
employees of Palo Alto Unified School District (PAUSD). 
Ms. Pearson reported the City's contribution equaled approximately 5 percent 
of the total development cost. 
Mr. Simitian indicated the initial discussion was an allocation of 12 units per 
district.  If the City contributed $3 million, more than 10 percent of units were 
intended for PAUSD employees.  The City was allowed to count 100 percent 
of the units towards its RHNA allocation. 
Lizanne Reynolds, Santa Clara County Counsel, added that the default 
arrangement was the City counting the units.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if the project was excluded from the City's 
Development Impact Fees. 
Ms. Chen reiterated that the project was subject to the County's approval 
process. 
Claire Ray, Planner, added that City Staff intended to discuss Development 
Impact Fees with the City Attorney. 
Gail Price, Palo Alto Forward, supported the project and the City's 
recommendation for a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) plan.  The 
project for workforce housing fulfilled a critical need. 
Rebecca Sanders, Palo Alto Neighborhoods, supported the development of 231 
Grant as teacher housing and expressed concerns regarding the size and scale 
of the project. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Stephen Levy supported the project and the Council's emphasis on workforce 
housing.  The project served education, equity, and the environment. 
Jennifer DiBrienza appreciated everyone's efforts to make this project a 
reality. 
Chris Robell supported the development of affordable housing for teachers and 
suggested the City review density, traffic, and parking. 
Mary Ryan, Birch Court Homeowners Association, expressed concerns about 
construction noise and traffic if the project and the Public Safety Building were 
constructed at the same time.   
Raayan Mohtashemi indicated that the project was modest and that teachers' 
employment should not affect their housing. 
Winter Dellenbach liked the setbacks and landscaping.  More than 30 percent 
of the units were below-market-rate (BMR) units.   
Terry Holzemer expressed concerns regarding height, density, open space, 
and neighborhood outreach.   
Kelsey Banes supported the project as proposed but preferred a taller building 
with more units. 
Angie Evans supported the proposal as a way to inspire young people to 
become educators and suggested childcare for the flex space.   
Rohin Ghosh looked forward to having teachers who lived in the community. 
Raven Malone supported the project but felt it proposed too much parking. 
Rebecca Eisenberg believed the project was essential to students returning to 
school, but teachers did not need parking.   
Daniel Allen supported the project because teachers planned to leave PAUSD 
because of the lack of affordable housing. 
Council Member Kou encouraged County Staff to engage the neighbors and 
asked if the tenants qualified for the Residential Preferential Parking Permit 
Program (RPP). 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that RPP eligibility was reviewed annually.   
Council Member Kou inquired about San Mateo County's participation in the 
project. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Mr. Simitian clarified that Facebook proposed the addition of employees of 
Ravenswood Elementary School, Menlo Park Elementary School District, and 
Menlo-Atherton High School.  This project was regional and served diverse 
student populations.   
Council Member Kou requested the maximum AMI for tenants. 
Ms. Pearson answered 140 percent AMI. 
Council Member Cormack was happy to support housing located on public 
land.  Requiring a TDM plan was appropriate because Park Boulevard was a 
bike route.  She inquired whether the courtyards were elevated. 
Ms. Pearson replied yes. 
Council Member Cormack emphasized points from the City's comment letter 
for the EIR.  Stakeholders included the Evergreen Park and Ventura 
neighborhoods and the California Merchants Association. 
Council Member Stone suggested the project include a playground.  A traffic 
analysis was going to be important.  He inquired about mitigation of 
construction impacts on neighbors. 
Mr. Shikada reported that City Staff was aware of the need to coordinate the 
project with the Public Safety Building (PSB). 
Mr. Simitian explained that the use of modular construction reduced the 
overall construction time by three or four months. 
Council Member Filseth noted the expansion of Boulware Park was needed to 
provide outdoor space for the project. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the household income was based on total 
household income or only district employee income. 
Ms. Pearson answered total household income.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the consequences of a household's 
income changing. 
Ms. Pearson advised that household income was usually certified annually. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if tenants were going to have to leave if their 
household income exceeded the maximum. 
Ms. Pearson related that that was likely, but policies were in development. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the AMI percentage for PAUSD 
teachers. 
Ms. Pearson explained that salary varied based on district and tenure, but 
most teachers' incomes were 80-plus percent of AMI. 
Vice Mayor Burt felt the project was both valuable and important.  He 
requested the percentage of two-bedroom units. 
Ms. Pearson responded 25 units or 23 percent. 
Vice Mayor Burt remarked that the project was consistent with the City's 
height limit and surrounding buildings.  The PHZ removed the cap on density.  
The source of the City's funding for this project was housing in-lieu fees.   
Mr. Simitian advised that he heard the concerns about a TDM, bicycle safety, 
and a traffic study.   
NO ACTION TAKEN 
2. 
3997 Fabian Way (20PLN-00287): Request for Pre-Screening of the 
Applicant's Proposal to Re-Zone the Subject Property From General 
Manufacturing (GM) to Planned Home Zoning (PHZ) and to Redevelop 
the Site With a 290-Unit Residential Development. Environmental 
Assessment: 
Not 
a 
Project. 
Zoning 
District: 
GM 
(General 
Manufacturing). 
Mayor DuBois returned at 6:26 P.M. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, reported the City 
was approximately 950 units short of the Comprehensive Plan goal for 
housing.  Staff spoke with a number of people interested in developing housing 
projects that provided approximately 1,000 units.  To qualify for Planned 
Home Zoning (PHZ), a project must provide 20 percent affordable housing 
and the same or more housing units than the demand created by any net new 
jobs.  The proposed project was located at the corner of Fabian and East 
Charleston.  The project proposed to remove 35,000 square feet of 
office/research and development (R&D) space and to construct 290 net new 
housing units.  The building height to the roofline was about 62 feet and to 
the parapet was about 68 feet.  The project had a floor area ratio (FAR) of 2.8 
and exceeded the maximum lot coverage.  The project proposed 290 units 
with 10-percent of units designated for very-low-income households and 
approximately $5 million toward in-lieu fees.  To provide housing, the project 
sought to exceed the maximum building height, maximum FAR, and maximum 
lot coverage.  The item before the Council was a prescreening, and no action 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
was requested.  Notice was sent to tenants and property owners as required 
for a formal application.   
Jeff Farrar, Applicant, recognized the need to generate housing in Palo Alto 
and to locate housing near jobs to ease traffic and environmental impacts.  A 
residential project on the site was in everyone's best interest.  The project 
included 290 units of multifamily residential with two levels of parking.  The 
site was located near jobs, the Highway 101 Bike Bridge, and near residential 
uses.  Environmentally, the best parking design was one floor below grade 
and one floor at grade with fresh-air ventilation.  Economically, five stories of 
rentable square footage was necessary to compete with commercial options.  
A building height of 67 feet was appropriate for the surrounding context.  He 
explored higher and lower densities, taller and shorter buildings, multiple unit 
sizes and mixes, various parking configurations, number of spaces, and 
parking technology.  If the Council's review was favorable, the formal design 
was going to incorporate massing, articulation, and detail in order to achieve 
high-quality architecture that was respectful of the surrounding community.  
The mix of units and sizes was going to be market driven.  He planned to 
provide Code-compliant parking for vehicles and bicycles, 29 units designated 
for very-low-income households, and more than $5 million in in-lieu housing 
fees.  The project was intended to contribute to the City's Sustainability and 
Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) goals through all-electric buildings, proximity to 
employment centers, and electric vehicle (EV) charging stations.   
Aram James inquired whether the applicant was amenable to setting aside 20 
percent of units for low-income African-American households in perpetuity.   
Veronica Tincher expressed concern about elderly pedestrians crossing Fabian 
at Charleston. 
Elyse Gerson, Moldaw Residences Executive Director, supported the creation 
of housing in Palo Alto but believed the project was too large and was going 
to negatively impact the health and safety of Moldaw residents.   
Shelley Hebert noted the project was the same scale as the existing building 
on the site, but setbacks were not proposed for the project.   
Robert Chun indicated the project was a no-brainer because of the City's need 
for housing. 
Rohin Ghosh supported the project and preferred larger structures.   
Raayan Hohtashemi supported the project and suggested additional density 
and units.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Randy Popp hoped the Council directed the Applicant to reduce and revise the 
project so that it was contextual with the neighborhood. 
Rick Gosalvez, SV @Home, encouraged the Council to advance the project.  
The project demonstrated the Council's commitment to housing and the City's 
need for housing.   
Bill Ross hoped the environmental analysis acknowledged the existing 
environment of inadequate fire protection services that had to be the subject 
of some type of mitigation.  The project needed to be subject to a labor 
agreement to demonstrate diversity in hiring local tradespeople.   
Keith Bennett, Save Palo Alto's Groundwater, expressed concern about the 
proposal for underground construction and wanted the Applicant to modify the 
depth of underground construction. 
Esther Nigenda understood that underground construction for residential 
buildings was not allowed in the floodplain.   
Rebecca Eisenberg supported the project and did not understand Moldaw 
Residences' objections to the project. 
Winter Dellenbach advised that the project was not equivalent to 25 percent 
affordable housing because the in-lieu fee equaled about 8.3 units of below-
market-rate (BMR) units.  The $5 million in-lieu fee was unreasonable. 
Kelsey Banes remarked that many of the surrounding sites were vacant.  The 
concerns regarding pedestrian safety were valid.   
Gail Price, Palo Alto Forward, supported the project because it increased 
housing as a community benefit.   
Raven Malone supported the project but wanted the project to provide more 
units and more affordable units.   
Judith Krongold expressed concern about the project adversely impacting 
sunlight and privacy for the Moldaw Residences.  Construction noise and dust 
were potential health risks for the elderly.   
Jordan Grimes supported the project and urged the Council to streamline 
processes to encourage the production of housing. 
Greg Zicarelli supported the project but expressed concern about underground 
construction on the site.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Ryan Globus supported the project and hoped the Council improved bicycle 
infrastructure in that part of Palo Alto.   
Council Member Filseth requested the height of the Moldaw Residences. 
Mr. Lait replied approximately 59 feet. 
Council Member Filseth remarked that potential projects provided the Council 
with some flexibility.  The project was a good use for the location and 
converted commercial space to residential space.  The proposed height was a 
concern. 
Council Member Kou requested an explanation of the maximum height. 
Mr. Lait advised that Planned Community (PC) zoning included a carve out for 
uses that were located within 150 feet of a residential PC or a single-family 
residential zone.  The PC for the Jewish Community Center (JCC) was mainly 
commercial, and single-family residential uses were not located near the site.  
Consequently, the maximum height was 50 feet, which the applicant proposed 
to exceed. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the locations of multifamily (RM-4, 
RM-5) housing. 
Mr. Lait indicated RM-4 and RM-5 zoning did not correspond to current zoning 
standards but were consistent with RM-30 and RM-40 zoning.  There was no 
RM-30 or RM-40 zoning in the area.  A 20- or 30-foot setback was located 
along the narrowest portion of the two buildings, and it widened as it neared 
East Charleston.   
Council Member Kou wanted further clarification of the height and setbacks.  
She inquired whether building height was measured to the roofline or the top 
of the parapet. 
Mr. Lait explained that height was measured to the top of the parapet.   
Council Member Stone felt the project site was the right location for housing.  
The only way to improve the jobs/housing imbalance was to convert office to 
residential.  Concerns were building height, the daylight plane, and 10-percent 
of units developed as affordable housing.  The housing in-lieu fee was 
comparable to six to ten affordable housing units.  Requiring the project to 
provide the full amount of affordable housing resulted in 30 or more additional 
units.  He inquired about the mix and location of affordable units. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
John Favreau, Applicant, related that the affordable housing units were going 
to be dispersed throughout the project, and the project was going to have a 
proportional number of studio, one-bedroom, and two-bedroom units.   
Council Member Stone requested the factors that determined whether a 
household obtained a studio, one-bedroom, or two-bedroom unit. 
Mr. Favreau indicated income and family size were the factors.   
Council Member Cormack remarked that the 50-foot height limit was a 34-
percent increase in height.  She requested the height of the JCC building. 
Sheldon Au Sing, Planner, answered 55 to 58 feet.  The variance for the 
building allowed a maximum height of 59 feet. 
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of the value of very-low-
income units. 
Mr. Lait reported only nonprofit organizations produced units at the very-low-
income level.  The City's requirement was one-third of units for households 
earning 80-100 percent area median income (AMI) and two-thirds of units for 
households earning 100-120 percent AMI.  The requirement ensured 
developments provided lower-income housing units onsite and developments 
met standards for inclusionary requirements.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether the selection of a different option 
resulted in more affordable units at the higher income levels. 
Mr. Lait replied yes. 
Council Member Cormack remarked that there were a lot of factors to consider 
for this project. 
Vice Mayor Burt recalled the development of a concept plan for Fabian Way 
and East Meadow in 2011 or 2012.  Any project at this site needed some 
ground-floor retail.  The Housing Incentive Plan (HIP) allowed an FAR of 1.5 
for market-rate projects.  The PHZ allowed the Council to consider a modest 
increase in the FAR.  The proposed FAR increase was significant.  Significantly, 
the project proposed all housing uses.  He preferred projects integrate 
affordable and workforce units.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if a toxic plume was located on the site. 
Mr. Lait replied yes. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether the building had to be constructed 
above grade because of the toxic plume. 
Mr. Au Sing advised that that aspect had not been studied because the 
applicant presented a concept plan only. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested placing all parking underground, if feasible, 
was one way to alleviate concerns about building height.  Outreach for the 
project was critical.  The payment of housing in-lieu fees was acceptable, but 
the proposed amount seemed low.   
Council Member Kou expressed concern about the building height, FAR, and 
number of affordable units and appreciated an all-housing project.  She 
preferred the applicant provide all affordable housing units rather than pay an 
in-lieu fee.   
Mayor DuBois related that some aspects of the project were positive.  The PHZ 
was presented to the Council as a way to make modest changes to 
development standards, but the project went too far.  Scaling the project back 
was likely to result in fewer housing units and a different mix of affordability.   
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Council took a break at 7:49 P.M. and returned at 8:00 P.M. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None. 
Oral Communications 
Aram James expressed interest in obtaining the racial makeup and 
associations with the Ku Klux Klan and other white nationalist organizations 
of Police Department personnel.  Perhaps the City Manager was willing to 
name a portion of Foothills Nature Preserve for LaDoris Cordell.   
Anupa Bajwa commented that the Council appeared to be piecemealing single-
family residential (R-1) zoning to accommodate private builders.  The Council 
needed to consider zoning holistically. 
Terry Holzemer remarked that transparency around a market at College 
Terrace Center was poor and requested information regarding the penalties 
charged and collected when there was not a market.  Limiting public speakers 
to one minute was ineffective.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Andie Reed objected to the unsolicited Castilleja questionnaire emailed to 
residents because it provided false choices and biased and misleading 
statements.  Castilleja's project was incompatible with the neighborhood and 
impactful to the entire City of Palo Alto. 
Rebecca Ward noted the San Francisco International Airport (SFO) Roundtable 
discussed Palo Alto's participation on the Roundtable and surveyed members 
in a closed meeting.  Palo Alto needed a seat on the Roundtable to address 
airplane noise. 
Rebecca Eisenberg reiterated prior comments regarding Vice Mayor Burt's 
environmental record and Police Officers participating in the Washington, D.C., 
riots.  Castilleja's application for a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) provided no 
public benefit, and the Council was not allowed to grant it. 
Mark Shull shared the reason for the SFO Roundtable being limited to 
jurisdictions in San Mateo County.  Joining the Roundtable was critical to 
achieving any progress on airplane noise. 
Chris Robell proposed the Council not impose additional taxes on residents 
and small local businesses.  He proposed the Council request an organization 
chart for the City  
Minutes Approval 
3. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the January 25, 2021 City Council Meeting 
Council Member Cormack requested the removal of Page 6 from the Minutes 
as it did not contain any meeting information. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to approve the Action Minutes for the January 25, 2021 City Council 
meeting, with removal of Page 6. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Aram James, addressing Agenda Item Numbers 4-6 and 8-9, recommended 
Council Member Tanaka and Vice Mayor Burt thoroughly review contracts to 
ensure there were no issues with expenditures.   
Rebecca Eisenberg, addressing Agenda Item Number 4-6 and 9, remarked 
that the contracts were not presented to the Council.  She opposed the 
appointment of Peter Drekmeier to the Emergency Standby Council. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Numbers 4 and 
6. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to approve Agenda Item Numbers 4-10. 
4. 
Approval of Contract Number C21180550A With TJKM for a Four-year 
Term Not-to-Exceed $800,000, and Contract Number C21180550B With 
Fehr and Peers for a Four-year Term Not-to-Exceed $800,000, for On-
call Transportation Engineering and Planning Project Support Services. 
5. 
Approval of Contract Number C21180050 With Clean Harbors 
Environmental 
Services, 
Inc. 
for 
Household 
Hazardous 
Waste 
Management and Emergency Response Services for a Five-year Term 
for a Total Amount Not-to-Exceed $1,650,000. 
6. 
Approval of Change Order Number 1 to Contract Number C20174826 
With Monterey Mechanical Co. Adding $300,000 for a Total Not-to-
Exceed Amount of $750,000 for the On-call Emergency Construction 
Services Project Funded in Wastewater Treatment Enterprise Fund 
Capital Improvement Program (Project WQ-19002) at the Regional 
Water Quality Control Plant. 
7. 
Adoption of a Park Improvement Ordinance for Renovations at Cameron 
Park. 
8. 
Appointment of the 2021 Emergency Standby Council. 
9. 
Approval of Construction Contract C21180619 With Cratus, Inc. in the 
Amount of $1,682,000 for Phase III of the Cross-bore Verification, 
Inspection, and Assessment Program; and Authorization to Execute and 
Negotiate Related Change Orders in the Amount of $168,200 for a Total 
Not-to-Exceed Amount of $1,850,200. 
10. 
Selection of Applicants to Interview for the Historic Resources Board and 
the Planning and Transportation Commission. 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 4 AND 6:  6-1 Tanaka 
no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 5, 7-10:  7-0 
Council Member Tanaka related that contracts on the Consent Calendar were 
worth several million dollars, and the Public Safety Building (PSB) project was 
going to add more than $5 million to capital expenses.  The Staff Report for 
Agenda Item Number 4 did not provide the amounts of all bids or indicate if 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
there was a rate increase.  In Agenda Item Number 6, the change order 
provided a 66 percent increase.  The Staff Report did not indicate the source 
of funding for the change order.   
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported Agenda Item Number 6 was funded 
through Wastewater Treatment Enterprise Funds, and commingling those 
funds with other funds was not possible.  The contract pertained to emergency 
construction services, leak repairs, and line replacements.  Additional dates 
for COVID-19 testing were available at Mitchell Park Community Center and 
the parking lot.  California Avenue was closed to vehicles and open to 
pedestrian access only.  Three blocks of University Avenue were going to be 
closed to vehicles and open to pedestrians only.  Staff was working with 
businesses on the closures of University Avenue.  The next Community Check-
In meeting was scheduled for February 19, 2021.  Public art murals were 
coming to business districts in mid-February 2021.  The Race & Equity 
Challenge was underway.  The online Community Survey was scheduled to 
close on February 10, 2021.  The beta version of the new City website was 
scheduled to go live on February 11, 2021.  Caltrans was going to close 
Highway 101 lanes for construction of the Highway 101 Bike Bridge on 
February 13-14, 2021.   
Council Member Kou noted the Community Check-in meeting was scheduled 
for February 16, 2021 rather than February 19. 
Action Items 
11. 
Review the Potential Financial Scenarios and Direction to Staff on 
Development of the Fiscal Year (FY) 2022 Budget; Review and Accept 
the FY 2022 Budget Development Guidelines; and Review and Accept 
the FY 2022 – 2031 Long Range Financial Forecast. 
Kiely Nose, Administrative Services Department Director/Chief Financial 
Officer, reported the Long Range Financial Forecast (LRFF) was based on the 
Council's decisions of May and June 2021.  Staff attempted to prepare 
information that allowed the Council to continue taking measured steps 
forward.   
Christine Paras, Administrative Services Department Assistant Director, 
advised that this was one of the touchpoints for the fiscal year (FY) 2022 
Budget process.  Staff anticipated returning to the Finance Committee with 
Proposed Operating and Capital Budgets in April 2021.  Staff prepared three 
FY 2022 financial balancing scenarios.  The options that Council selected were 
going to guide the FY 2022 Budget process and build on service reductions.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
In preparing the balancing scenarios and LRFF, Staff considered fiscal 
pressures and the economy.  Scenario A assumed a two-to-three-year 
economic recovery with tax revenues rebounding to pre-COVID-19 levels and 
resulted in a $9.2 million cumulative net operating gap.  Scenario B assumed 
a three-to-five-year recovery with slow growth and resulted in a $17.6 million 
cumulative net operating gap.  Scenario C assumed a seven-to-ten-year 
recovery period with tax revenues falling $7 million short of pre-COVID-19 
levels in the fifth year and resulted in a $26 million cumulative net operating 
gap. The LRFF for the base case reflected revenues and expenditures 
balancing in FY 2027.  In December 2020, the Finance Committee requested 
an alternative scenario for salaries remaining at the same level in FY 2021 and 
FY 2022.  The alternative scenario reflected a $3.1 million gap in FY 2022.  
Over the ten-year period, the cumulative operating margin was $10.4 million.  
Staff recommended the Council select a financial scenario for Staff to use in 
planning and issuance of the FY 2022 Proposed Budget.   
Council Member Cormack requested a compound annual growth rate for the 
spreadsheet shown on Page 308.  She inquired whether workers' 
compensation increases were the result of more claims, higher amounts, or 
both.  The Staff Report did not mention potential medium-term changes to 
Stanford University operations.   
Vice Mayor Burt requested clarification of the combined base and Transient 
Occupancy Tax (TOT) transfer amounts in the outlying five years projected for 
infrastructure funds, non-utility. 
Ms. Nose indicated the base transfer to infrastructure was $6.9 million in 2021 
and $7 million in 2022.  The projected TOT transfer in 2021 was approximately 
$2 million.   
Council Member Filseth inquired about the possibility of receiving good 
estimates for Educational Revenue Augmentation Fund (ERAF) distributions 
and action by the County of Santa Clara (County) on Proposition 8 in March 
2021.   
Ms. Nose related that the residential ERAF was likely to be available in March, 
but the commercial and industrial estimates were due in the April to June 
timeframe.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the causes for the LRFF showing a 7.1 
percent increase in expenditures in FY 2023.   
Ms. Paras explained that the increase was attributable to pension increases 
and restoration of the base transfer to capital.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Council Member Tanaka requested the modeling used to develop the revenue 
forecasts. 
Ms. Nose advised that Staff worked with consultants and researched trends 
and projections.  She suggested Council Members focus on the overall trend 
rather than individual estimates.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if Staff sought the opinions of local business 
owners and managers. 
Ms. Nose noted Staff met with local businesses every few weeks. 
Council Member Stone asked if Staff considered business travel into Palo Alto 
never returning to pre-COVID-19 levels. 
Ms. Nose explained that none of the scenarios predicted a return to pre-
COVID-19 levels in the five-year period.  The long-term impacts were 
unknown. 
Council Member Stone requested the cause for the significant increase in the 
cost of services. 
Ms. Nose indicated a significant driver for that growth in FY 2023 was a 50-
percent increase in the transfer to infrastructure.   
Mayor DuBois asked if the Council needed to reduce expenses by $10 million 
in the first year or every year of the base case. 
Ms. Nose related that the reduction was $17.6 million in addition to the 
reductions made in FY 2021.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager, clarified that the cuts needed to be ongoing rather 
than one-time. 
Mayor DuBois inquired whether the Council needed to consider using reserve 
funds. 
Ms. Nose cautioned the Council to utilize one-time funds for one-time needs.  
Reserve funds were designed to bridge a period of uncertainty.   
Aram James believed the process for the Public Safety Building (PSB) was not 
fair.   
Rebecca Eisenberg advocated for a business tax.   
Council Member Kou inquired about service cuts. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Ms. Nose stated reductions were part of the budget process, but they were 
likely to affect the organization as a whole. 
Council Member Kou asked when the Proposed Budget was going to be 
published. 
Ms. Nose answered the end of April.   
Council Member Tanaka felt the FY 2020 LRFF was no longer accurate or 
possible.  The Scenario A and B projections for Sales Tax were probably wishful 
thinking.  Local business owners did not believe Sales Tax and TOT were going 
to return to pre-COVID-19 levels for many years.  Scenario C was optimistic 
but the most realistic projection of the three. 
Vice Mayor Burt recalled City finances in 2008 and 2009 when the Great 
Recession occurred.  Property tax continued to grow through the Proposition 
13 reappraisal of property at the time of sale.  The TOT was the dedicated 
revenue stream for the capital plan, and that revenue stream was virtually 
gone.  The capital plan had to be adjusted.   
Council Member Cormack indicated Scenario B was conservative and plausible.  
The cuts made in 2020 likely had not impacted the community yet.  She 
suggested Staff consider Stanford University operations in the projections. 
Mr. Shikada reported Stanford University was planning to bring undergraduate 
students back to campus for the spring quarter.  Plans had not been made for 
sports. 
Mayor DuBois stated starting with Scenario B and adjusting the projections as 
data became available was the appropriate action.  Decisions had to be based 
on data.  The Council needed to take a position on utilizing reserve funds for 
a year or two.   
Council Member Filseth felt Property Tax may be more promising than 
projected.  The temptation was to utilize Scenario C.  The transfer to capital 
was a way to modulate the capital plan.   
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to:  
A. 
Build a FY 2022 proposed budget assuming Scenario B and direct Staff 
to reassess Scenarios A, B, and C in the Fall of 2021 with the Finance 
Committee for any changes in economic conditions; and  
B. 
Accept the FY 2022 to 2031 General Fund Long Range Financial Forecast 
and the three annual Budget Development Guidelines. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt proposed an Amendment altering the capital plan. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to forward the following to the Finance Committee 
for discussion prior to the Budget process: 
A. 
Direct Staff to return with versions of Scenario B whereby Council 
reviews extending and or dropping certain portions of the five-year 
capital plan; 
B. 
Evaluate whether to finance any elements of the capital plan;  
C. 
Explore one-time modest reductions in the Budget Stabilization Reserve 
to provide a bridge, while we address strategic changes to our operating 
expenses. 
Mayor DuBois questioned whether the Council needed to review adjustments 
as part of the budget process. 
Vice Mayor Burt inquired whether the Council needed to review the scenarios 
in April or May in order to incorporate them into the budget. 
Ms. Nose interpreted the Amendment as Staff preparing a budget for each 
scenario in addition to the Proposed Operating and Capital Budgets.  There 
was not sufficient time for Staff to go through those machinations. 
Vice Mayor Burt clarified that Staff was to adjust the information provided in 
the Staff Report for each scenario and identify the implications. 
Ms. Nose asked if the Council wanted to see the bottom-line effects on the 
operating margin and the effects on infrastructure projects. 
Council Member Filseth envisioned Staff prioritizing the Capital Plan.   
Vice Mayor Burt suggested the Capital adjustments fell into two categories, 
projects extended on the time horizon and projects not included in the seven-
year plan. 
Mr. Shikada reported the resulting information was likely to be a package of 
project deferrals based on dollar amounts.  The challenge was one-time 
funding.  Deferrals might provide cash for use in FY 2022, but it was one-time 
funding.   
Vice Mayor Burt did not agree that it was one-time funding.  Dropping projects 
from the Capital Plan did not provide one-time funding.  Extending the time 
horizon to seven years was going to move all the numbers through a recovery 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
period.  The City provided services, and the Council was talking about cutting 
services.  The community had not yet experienced the impacts of the cuts 
already made.  The Council needed to review the aggressive nature of the 
Capital Plan in the midst of an economic crisis 
Council Member Filseth explained that delaying a project for a year provided 
a one-time savings in capital costs.  Delaying a project outside the seven-year 
window was the same as killing the project.  If the Council used precise 
wording for delaying and killing projects, one-time versus recurring funding 
was not an issue.   
Vice Mayor Burt believed financing Capital projects over a 20-year period 
spread out the expense because of the low interest and inflation rates.   
Council Member Filseth accepted the Amendment as long as the Council used 
caution in considering financing projects. 
Mr. Shikada clarified that between the present time and April, Staff was going 
to use a detailed review of the Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) as potential 
mitigation for the Operating Budget.   
Ms. Nose stated the timing was problematic for Staff capacity.  Preparing the 
Proposed Budgets and balancing scenarios and compiling all the details 
required a few weeks.  Staff was already working seven days a week.  She 
proposed Staff include the options in the Proposed Budgets and present 
everything to the Finance Committee for review.   
Council Member Filseth noted the base and TOT transfers to capital in FY 2022 
totaled approximately $15 million.  He inquired whether the process Ms. Nose 
outlined allowed the Council to make intelligent decisions for making cuts. 
Ms. Nose answered yes.  During the Budget process for FY 2021, Staff 
adjusted the CIP based on direction from the Council.   
Mr. Shikada suspected Staff was going to need to return to the Council to 
develop criteria for dropping portions of the five-year capital plan. 
Mayor DuBois indicated the Council needed to review the Infrastructure Plan 
and options.   
AMENDED INCORPORATION INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT 
OF THE MAKER AND SECONDER to forward the following to the Finance 
Committee for discussion as part of the Budget process: 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
A. 
Direct Staff to return with versions of Scenario B whereby Council 
reviews extending and/or dropping certain portions of the five-
year capital plan; 
B. 
Evaluate whether to finance any elements of the capital plan; and 
C. 
Explore one-time modest reductions in the Budget Stabilization 
Reserve to provide a bridge while Council addresses strategic 
changes to operating expenses. 
Council Member Stone looked forward to reviewing the capital plan.   
Council Member Cormack did not understand the rationale for including 
Scenario A in Subpart A of the Motion. 
Council Member Filseth noted the intent of Subpart A was for Staff to reassess 
in the fall of 2021 with the Finance Committee for any changes in economic 
conditions. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change Motion Part A to state "… and direct Staff 
to reassess in Fall 2021 … ." 
Council Member Cormack related that Subpart C.i pertained to prioritization 
of the Infrastructure Plan.  She disagreed with Subpart C.iii because the 
Budget Stabilization Reserve was used to pay Staff in the early days of the 
pandemic.  Previously, the strategic changes were outsourcing work.   
Council Member Kou asked if the capital plan included repairs and replacement 
for maintenance of facilities. 
Mayor DuBois answered yes. 
Council Member Kou requested an estimate of the amount needed for City 
Council's existing Priorities. 
Ms. Nose did not have an estimate at the current time.  Staff intended to 
highlight Council Priorities in discussions of the Community and Economic 
Recovery Workplan and Proposed Budgets.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the line on the chart that was associated 
with Subpart B of the Motion. 
Ms. Paras replied Scenario B. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Council Member Tanaka requested the actions needed if actual revenues did 
not support Scenario B. 
Mr. Shikada advised that Council was providing the input for development of 
the FY 2022 Budget.  In the fall of 2021, Staff intended to present the data 
and confirm assumptions with the Council.  At that time, additional 
adjustments based on the data were possible.   
Council Member Tanaka expressed concern that Scenario B was slightly too 
optimistic and that the Council was going to have to make emergency rather 
than planned reductions in the fall.  He requested the Mayor split the Motion. 
Mayor DuBois did not agree to split the Motion. 
Ms. Nose advised that Subpart C contemplated everything stemming from 
Scenario B. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Mayor 
DuBois to: 
A. 
Build a FY 2022 proposed budget assuming Scenario B and direct Staff 
to reassess in Fall of 2021 with the Finance Committee for any changes 
in economic conditions; and  
B. 
Accept the FY 2022 to 2031 General Fund Long Range Financial Forecast 
and the three annual Budget Development Guidelines; and 
C. 
Forward the following to the Finance Committee for discussion as part 
of the Budget process: 
i. 
Direct Staff to return with versions of Scenario B whereby Council 
reviews extending and/or dropping certain portions of the five-
year capital plan; 
ii. 
Evaluate whether to finance any elements of the capital plan; 
iii. 
Explore one-time modest reductions in the Budget Stabilization 
Reserve to provide a bridge, while we address strategic changes 
to our operating expenses. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
Council took a break at 10:22 P.M. and returned at 10:30 P.M. 
12. 
Policy and Services Committee Recommends the City Council Approve 
the 2021 Legislative Guidelines; Utilities Advisory Commission 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Recommends the City Council Approve the 2021 Utilities Legislative 
Guidelines; and Discussion and Direction on Pending State Legislation. 
Chantal Cotton Gaines, Deputy City Manager, reported the categories for the 
Legislative Guidelines remained the same.  Adoption of the Guidelines was 
typically placed on the Consent Calendar.  The Utilities Legislative Guidelines 
were similar to the Legislative Guidelines, and the Utilities Advisory 
Commission approved them in November 2020.   
Niccolo De Luca, Townsend Public Affairs, advised that the deadline to 
introduce bills was February 19, 2021.  COVID-19 relief and response, climate 
resiliency, housing, homelessness, social equity, and police reform were 
expected to dominate legislative topics.  Approximately 625 bills were 
introduced in January, and another 2,000 were anticipated prior to the 
deadline.  The Governor and his Administration were focused on the COVID-
19 vaccine and reopening schools and the economy. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines shared the format of information about legislation.   
Mayor DuBois announced direction to Staff regarding legislation was continued 
to a future meeting.   
Aram James inquired about legislation for encryption of Police Department 
communications, police reform, and local reparation commissions.   
Rebecca Eisenberg remarked that the Council needed to accept laws as laws 
rather than guidelines and to remember that approximately half of the 
community rented their homes.   
Council Member Kou related that she did not support the Policy and Services 
Committee's (P&S) recommendation because she wanted a stronger 
legislative guideline. 
Council Member Filseth requested the importance of wordsmithing the 
Legislative Guidelines. 
Mr. De Luca advised that the document was perfect as written.  It provided 
him with direction and flexibility to advocate on behalf of the City.   
Council Member Filseth asked about plans for the latest budget windfall. 
Mr. De Luca noted Assembly and Senate leadership were focused on 
homelessness, small business support, and COVID-19 vaccine distribution.   
Council Member Filseth inquired about the likelihood of the City receiving 
funding for homelessness. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Mr. De Luca indicated the possibility was real. 
Vice Mayor Burt noted the Legislative Guidelines did not address renter 
protections and encryption of Police Department communications.  He inquired 
whether the Legislative Guidelines allowed the Council to respond in real-time 
and in a focused way. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines reported housing and police reform were appropriate 
categories for renter protections and encryption of communications.   
Mr. De Luca recommended separating legislation into buckets of priority bills 
and bills to watch and holding monthly discussions with P&S about legislation.   
Vice Mayor Burt added a third bucket of legislation for local Legislators to 
sponsor.   
Council Member Cormack commented on the similarity of the Legislature's 
focus and the Council Priorities.  She asked Council Members to think about 
adding health and Sales Tax reform.   
Council Member Kou believed Senate Bill (SB) 731, 776 and 1550 were going 
to return. 
Mr. De Luca advised that SB 731 and 776 were re-introduced. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to: 
A. 
Approve the City’s 2021 Legislative Guidelines as recommended by the 
Policy and Services Committee on December 8, 2020;  
B. 
Approve the 2021 Utilities Legislative Policy Guidelines as recommended 
by the Utilities Advisory Committee on November 4, 2020; and  
C. 
Direct Policy and Services Committee to continue to discuss the 
Legislative Guidelines on a regular basis for possible refinement. 
Council Member Kou indicated SB 731 and 776 and SB 1550 could be added 
to the police reform category and the social justice category respectively.  
Tracking the numerous bills was overwhelming, but legislation impacted the 
City in so many ways.   
Mr. De Luca explained that the Legislative Guidelines provided him with a 
mission to seek bills on the various topics.  He needed a deep forensic dive 
with Staff into City policy to provide the exact impact of legislation on Palo 
Alto.  In his suggestion, P&S acted as a clearinghouse.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Council Member Stone appreciated the list of topics and looked forward to a 
discussion before P&S.  He inquired whether there was ever an opportunity to 
attach a list of specific items to the Legislative Guidelines. 
Mr. De Luca was not aware of a list being attached to the Legislative Guidelines 
in years past.   
Mr. Shikada added that previous Legislative Guidelines were voluminous, 
difficult to work with, and difficult to apply to specific bills.   
Vice Mayor Burt noted a disconnect between the number of bills and Staff's 
capacity to analyze and track them all.   
Council Member Stone appreciated Mr. De Luca's suggestion for the City to 
propose changes to legislation rather than to oppose legislation.  He asked if 
the City had done that previously. 
Mr. De Luca reported a few years ago he worked with a Legislator's office and 
City Staff to draft useful verbiage.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion a new Part D “Continue to a 
date uncertain discussion of specific bills pending in the state.” 
Mayor DuBois hoped the Council supported funding for unhoused programs, 
renter protections, access to police departments' encrypted communications, 
and Sales Tax reform.   
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Mayor 
DuBois to: 
A. 
Approve the City’s 2021 Legislative Guidelines as recommended by the 
Policy and Services Committee on December 8, 2020;  
B. 
Approve the 2021 Utilities Legislative Policy Guidelines as recommended 
by the Utilities Advisory Committee on November 4, 2020; 
C. 
Direct Policy and Services Committee to continue to discuss the 
Legislative Guidelines on a regular basis for possible refinement; and 
D. 
Continue to a date uncertain discussion of specific bills pending in the 
state. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
13. 
Provide Direction on the Recruitment for an Unfinished Term on the 
Planning and Transportation Commission due to a Resignation. 
Beth Minor, City Clerk, reported recruitments closed recently, and 
appointments were scheduled for February 22, 2021.  Staff sought direction 
regarding a two-week recruitment or a six-week recruitment for the vacant 
seat on the Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC).   
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that Staff planned to return to Council 
with an Ordinance that changed appointments to the spring.  If the change 
was approved, the Council had an option to extend appointments to the 
following May or proceed with appointments in December.   
Aram James related that Ms. Eisenberg was interested in serving on the PTC 
and was an incredible resource. 
Mayor DuBois asked the Council to focus on the vacant seat on the PTC.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to: 
A. 
Proceed with a special recruitment period for the vacant position, which 
will run for 2 weeks with a proposed application deadline of February 23, 
2021; 
B. 
Include current Planning and Transportation Commission applications in 
the special recruitment, if the applicant agrees; and 
C. 
Applicants who participated in the current round of interviews will not 
be interviewed during the special recruitment. 
Mayor DuBois supported a separate recruitment because most people did not 
realize there was a third open seat on the PTC.   
Council Member Cormack noted the Council was going to impose term limits 
for Boards and Commissions and asked if a partial term counted toward term 
limits. 
Ms. Stump advised that the issue was not decided.   
Council Member Cormack encouraged the City Clerk to clearly notify applicants 
of the terms, application deadlines, and appointment dates.   
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 26 
Sp.  City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  02/08/2021 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Mayor DuBois reported the Palo Alto Players were offering a virtual production, 
and he toured the new Junior Museum and Zoo.  He encouraged the public to 
continue with COVID-19 tests. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned in honor of George Schultz at 
11:45 P.M. 
