SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 17 
City Council  
Special Meeting 
August 16, 2021 
5:00 PM 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Participating Remotely:  
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
Filseth 
Special Orders of the Day 
1. 
Presentation from Valley Water Regarding Drought Conditions. 
Gary Kremen, Valley Water Executive Director, reported water supply over the 
past two years was the worst in California's history.  Valley Water recharged 
more than 270 wells in Palo Alto and provided clean water, flood protection, 
and environmental restoration.  Over the past five years, Valley Water grant 
programs funded 14 projects located in Palo Alto and provided $80 million for 
San Francisquito Creek flood protection projects.  Valley Water also provided 
funding for trail purchase, creation, and maintenance.  In Santa Clara County, 
residences utilized 55 percent of water while businesses utilized 30 percent.  
Local water sources were comprised of 30 percent local, 50 percent imported, 
5 percent recycled, and 15 percent conservation.  2021 was the driest year 
since 1977.  Because of the drought, groundwater wells were likely to run dry, 
and purchasing and accessing water were difficult.  Conservation efforts were 
underway locally and statewide.  Water prices quadrupled recently.  Recycled 
and purified water represented drought-resilient water sources.  Funding may 
be available to return workers to the recycled water project.  Valley Water 
partnered with the City to provide water conservation programs. 
Mayor DuBois thanked Mr. Kremen for his presentation.  He encouraged 
Council Members and the public to contact Valley Water if they had questions. 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Study Session 
2. 
280 & 300 Lambert Avenue (21PLN-00133): Request for Prescreening 
of a Proposal by Lambert Fields, LLC to Rezone the Properties at 280 
and 300 Lambert Avenue from Service Commercial (CS) to Planned 
Home Zone (PHZ), Merge Parcels Into One Parcel, and Develop the Site 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
with a 49-Unit Residential Development. Environmental Assessment: 
Not a Project. Zoning District: CS (Service Commercial). 
Contract Planner Sheldon Ah Sing reported tradeoffs of Planned Home Zone 
(PHZ) projects included increased density, massing, and height.  Because the 
proposed project was located on two parcels, the parcels needed to be 
merged.  The site was located within the North Ventura Coordinated Area Plan 
(NVCAP).  The project proposed 49 net new housing units comprised of one, 
two, and three bedrooms.  The residential use was going to replace an auto 
use and result in a net decrease in jobs.  The 2.66 Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 
exceeded the base zoning.  The proposed project was compliant with the 20-
percent inclusionary requirement.  The Applicant proposed a balance of 
affordability levels for the ten units.  The project site was surrounded by 
parcels zoned multifamily residential (RM-30), Public Facility (PF), single-
family residential (R-1), and General Manufacturing (GM).  The front building 
with a height of 35 feet contained ten townhouse units with one story below 
grade and three stories above grade.  The rear building contained 39 units 
over five floors and one floor of below-grade parking.  At a height of 55 feet, 
the rear building exceeded the Zoning Code and the Planned Community (PC) 
height limit of 50 feet.  The proposed Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of 2.66 exceeded 
the 0.6 FAR allowed in the Service Commercial (CS) Zone.  The rear building 
was going to be one of the tallest buildings in the area.  The project appeared 
to be consistent with many of the Council's goals for the NVCAP area and a 
range of alternatives that the Council discussed in June.  Each PHZ project 
presented unique challenges for development, and the tradeoffs for each 
project needed to be evaluated.  The proposed project did not include a 
commercial component.  The Applicant proposed a reduction in the rear 
setback, and Staff and the Applicant discussed compliance with the setback to 
provide access to open space along Matadero Creek.  The purpose of a pre-
screening was to obtain the Council's feedback.   
Jeff Galbraith, Applicant, advised that an all-residential project was proposed 
in response to NVCAP goals and residents' feedback to past projects in the 
neighborhood.  The project complied with the 20-percent affordable housing 
goal and a positive housing/jobs balance.  The townhouses were placed along 
Lambert Avenue in order to continue the residential feel of the street.  The 
rear building was going to have units on the front and rear of the building.  A 
courtyard was proposed for each townhome to provide light and air to the 
below-grade level.  A courtyard between the two buildings extended to the 
corner of the property fronting Lambert.  In the rear building, a shared 
amenity space and bike parking faced the courtyard.  From the street, the 
rear building was not visible, and the townhomes established the scale of the 
project from the street view.  The underground garage provided stackers 
along the perimeter and parking stalls in the center and adjacent to 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
townhouses.  All townhouses contained two bedrooms while the rear building 
offered a mix of one-, two-, and three-bedroom units.  Seventy-five parking 
spaces were required, and the project provided 64 spaces.  With a 
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) reduction, the project complied 
with the parking requirement.  The townhouses were located closer to the 
street than most single-family residences, but landscape screening, a porch, 
and below-grade bedrooms created a residential feel.  A few neighbors 
attended an outreach meeting the previous week. 
Jeff Levinsky noted that the PC height limit for a building located within 150 
feet of RM-30 zoning was 35 feet.  The proposed building with a height of 55 
feet was considerably taller than allowed.  If the project was 100 percent 
affordable housing, the allowed height limit was 50 feet.  The proposed project 
seemed to be eliminating an opportunity to provide approximately $45 million 
in additional affordable housing benefits.   
Terry Holzemer commented that the project site abutted at least two RM-30 
zones, and the height limit for the site was 35 feet.  Only one member of the 
NVCAP Working Group supported Alternative 3B, which was utilized in the 
presentation.   
Becky Sanders expressed concern regarding the building height, especially as 
the project was not all affordable housing.  The Ventura neighborhood did not 
have parity with other neighborhoods.   
Kelsey Banes urged the Council to support the project.  The project provided 
affordable housing without a subsidy.  The condominiums were going to be 
affordable in comparison to single-family home prices. 
Ryan Globus supported the project and concurred with Ms. Banes' comments.   
Waldek Kazmarski expressed concern about the density of the project.  The 
NVCAP did not support the density proposed for the project.  The project was 
going to set a precedent for future projects.   
Council Member Cormack appreciated the stepping back of the buildings, the 
inclusion of family units, the relative affordability of condominiums for new 
homeowners, and community benefits of $15 million to $17 million.  She 
supported a 55-foot height limit for projects with affordable housing.  The 
Applicant's requests for concessions were appropriate.  She inquired regarding 
the use located at 278 Lambert Avenue. 
Mr. Galbraith was not aware of the current use, but it was not residential. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
Council Member Cormack agreed with Staff's proposal to remove two units 
from the rear setback in order to provide access to Matadero Creek.  The 
neighbors' concerns about traffic and density were reasonable, but both 
appeared to be manageable.  The parking reduction was minimal and feasible. 
Vice Mayor Burt commented that replacing auto repair facilities with housing 
was a positive development.  The Council previously discussed moderate 
increases in base zoning.  The proposed FAR of 2.66 was a fairly significant 
increase.  He preferred the floors closest to R-1 housing step down such that 
the townhouses were two stories and the rear building was four stories.  A 
TDM program was a prerequisite for projects in the area.  TDM programs 
should reduce parking demand and car trips.  Extensive self-certification of 
compliance with TDM plans was needed.  The area did not have good bike 
facilities for school commutes.  He encouraged the Applicant to explore adding 
a small community garden to build a sense of community.  Townhouses were 
less expensive than single-family houses, but they were not affordable 
housing.  He supported the project moving forward for refinement. 
Council Member Stone indicated that a market-rate, one-bedroom unit in the 
project was estimated to cost $987,000.  In light of financial constraints, 100-
percent affordable housing projects were probably not going to occur.  The 
location was appropriate for housing growth.  Moderate tradeoffs between 
base requirements and a PHZ project were acceptable as a way to increase 
affordable housing production.  He inquired about the application of Municipal 
Code Section 18.38.150(d) to the project. 
Director of Planning and Development Services Jonathan Lait referred to CS 
development standards, which limited building height to 50 feet generally and 
35 feet specifically for buildings located within 150 feet of a residential district.  
Staff's interpretation of the standard generated community interest.  The Code 
language was poorly written and required analysis, particularly for commercial 
districts.  Section 18.38.150 also stated a project that included 60 percent or 
more floor area was allowed a height limit of 50 feet when adjacent to RM-4 
or RM-5 parcels.  Current language for PC zoning implied a willingness to 
contemplate a height limit up to 50 feet near RM-30 and RM-40 parcels.   
Council Member Stone felt allowing 5 feet above a 50-foot height limit was a 
reasonable tradeoff for affordable housing, but 20 feet above a 35-foot height 
limit required community discussion.   
Council Member Kou indicated that clarification of the height limit was needed 
in order to comment on the project.  PC zoning exceptions allowed developers 
to propose larger and denser projects with less parking.  The number of 
benefits provided to developers by PHZ was troubling.  The project was going 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
to increase the deficit of parkland per resident.  There was no information as 
to whether people utilized parking lifts rather than on-street parking.  
Therefore, reducing the parking requirement based on the use of lifts was a 
concern.  Neighbors' quality of life was going to be impacted greatly.  She 
requested the rationale for not requiring a transition to the RM-30 property 
behind the project site and for mentioning RM-4 and RM-5 zones when they 
were removed from the Municipal Code. 
Mr. Lait reported the mention of RM-4 and RM-5 zones was a result of the 
Zoning Code containing outmoded references.  The Staff Report's discussion 
of height limits was not as explicit as possible, and future reports and 
presentations would be clearer. 
Council Member Kou believed City Codes needed to be clear and explicit to 
engender the public's trust.   
Council Member Tanaka liked the underground parking and encouraged the 
use of stackers to provide the required 75 parking spaces.  He inquired about 
bike parking proposed in the project. 
Mr. Lait noted that the plans were currently conceptual, and not all details 
were available. 
Mr. Ah Sing advised that the Applicant designated space for bike parking but 
did not provide the number of spaces.  Staff anticipated bike parking was 
going to conform to requirements. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked that bike parking was conducive to the use 
of public transportation and expressed interest in the project complying with 
or exceeding requirements.  He preferred smaller units because they were 
naturally more affordable and encouraged the use of more parking lifts to 
accommodate more vehicles in the same amount of space.  Adding a public or 
community space was one method to gain community support. 
Mayor DuBois preferred the project contain units for low- and extremely-low-
income households.  He inquired about a timeline for the project. 
Mr. Galbraith anticipated one year to obtain project approval and a second 
year to obtain building permits.  Construction was likely to require a year and 
a half.   
Mayor DuBois noted the current height limit for CS zoning was 35 feet.  
Allowing a height over 50 feet was a large concession.  The project proposed 
20-percent affordable units while the City required 15 percent.  He agreed 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
with the suggestion to step down the buildings closest to the R-1 parcels.  He 
inquired regarding plans to utilize the roof. 
Mr. Galbraith indicated there were no plans to use the roof for a garden or 
open space. 
Mayor DuBois preferred no active use of the rooftop to allay privacy concerns.  
A less industrial appearance that was compatible with a residential area was 
desirable.  He supported the project with some minor changes to reduce the 
height to 50 feet and provide open space at the creek.   
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor DuBois announced that the Closed Session was continued to August 23, 
2021 and that there were no Consent Calendar items.  
Council Member Cormack noted that the minutes were not distributed to the 
Council separately in advance of the meeting.  
Oral Communications 
None.  
Minutes Approval 
3. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the August 9, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
City Clerk Lesley Milton advised that the Minutes were provided in the packet 
and linked on the website but not distributed individually to the Council.   
ACTION:  Minutes were continued to the next meeting at the request of the 
City Clerk.  
The City Council adjourned for a break at 6:33 PM and reconvened at 6:42 
PM.  
City Manager Comments 
City Manager Ed Shikada reported that visitors to hospitals were now required 
to show proof of COVID-19 vaccination.  The mask mandate was in effect 
throughout the community and in City facilities.  COVID-19 tests were 
available on Tuesdays at Mitchell Park Library, Wednesdays at City Hall, and 
on August 23, 2021, September 27, 2021, and October 25, 2021 at Cubberley 
Pavilion.  Phase 3 of the Charleston/Arastradero Project was scheduled to 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
begin in late August 2021 with temporary markings.  A community meeting 
on the project was scheduled for September 9, 2021.  Mitchell Park, 
Rinconada, and Children's libraries were open, and Downtown and College 
Terrace libraries were going to open on Thursday and Friday afternoons 
beginning August 26, 2021.  The Sustainability and Climate Action Plan 
(S/CAP) Ad Hoc Committee met the prior week, and the next meeting was 
scheduled for September 9, 2021.  Upcoming Agenda items for the Council 
included grade separation alternatives, Foothills fire mitigation strategies, 
strategies to assist unhoused individuals, economic recovery, the Independent 
Police Auditor (IPA), North Ventura Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP), appeal of 
a safe parking permit, and parking management and updates. 
City Clerk Lesley Milton reported beginning August 23, 2021, the Agenda was 
provided online in its entirety with bookmarks on the left side of the screen 
for Staff Reports and attachments.  The new process increased efficiency, 
provided a comprehensive legislative record, and allowed consecutive page 
numbering of the entire packet.  Future improvements included a font that 
was more accessible for impaired persons, web-based agendas, and increased 
searchability.  She requested Council Members and the public provide 
comments on the changes.  Recruitments were underway for positions in the 
Clerk's Office.   
Action Items 
4. 
Finance Committee Recommends the City Council Decline to Adopt the 
Energy Storage System Targets; and Receive the 2020 Energy Storage 
Report. 
Director of Utilities Dean Batchelor reported Assembly Bill (AB) 2414 required 
publicly owned utilities to investigate the cost effectiveness of energy storage 
systems every three years. 
Senior Resource Planner Lena Perkins advised that battery installations were 
surging while costs decreased.  City of Palo Alto Utilities (CPAU) did not set 
energy storage targets in 2011, 2014, or 2017.  Analyses conducted in 2020 
concluded that energy storage was not yet cost effective.  CPAU was not going 
to set energy storage targets in 2020 but was going to align incentives and 
continue looking for opportunities.  Distributed storage was advantageous for 
lowering carbon emissions, empowering customers, and improving resiliency.  
Currently, procurement of renewable energy was less costly than storage of 
renewable energy.  Staff evaluated proposals for distributed energy to 
improve resiliency.  Excluding resiliency benefits, batteries did not save money 
for homeowners with solar facilities and were an expensive method for saving 
a small amount of carbon.  Commercial customers were charging batteries 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
overnight when electricity was dirtiest and utilizing stored energy during peak 
midday hours when electricity was cleanest.  Commercial customers were able 
to reduce costs with batteries, but this use increased grid emissions.  Staff 
was investigating the use of batteries for more specific cases of resiliency, 
working to align incentives as storage prices decreased, and considering pilot 
programs for smart electric heat pumps and smart charging for electric 
vehicles (EV).   
Council Member Cormack indicated that all Finance Committee members 
agreed that setting goals was not appropriate.  However, one member wanted 
further discussion of next steps.   
Steve Rosenblum stated that the Staff Report addressed costs and only 
referenced climate change.  Residents were responsible for an inordinate 
amount of global warming per person compared to other people.  The low cost 
of carbon made other measures less attractive economically.  The Council 
needed to direct Staff to encourage energy storage. 
Vice Mayor Burt noted that the Staff Report included a valuable breakdown of 
next steps regarding storage systems, but resources were not allocated for 
next steps.  A half-time Staff person was needed to make some progress.  The 
price of carbon was rising, but more importantly the cost of batteries 
decreased 88 percent over the past ten years.  The City needed to proceed 
now in order to take advantage of and prepare for implementation of storage 
technologies.  Climate change was accelerating, and the City needed to 
respond with climate protections and adaptations.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Stone to: 
A. 
Direct Staff to return to the Sustainability and Climate Action Plan 
(S/CAP) Ad Hoc Committee with a further plan for accelerating the 
exploration of expanded energy storage systems and to identify the 
resources for Staff to implement; and 
B. 
Decline to adopt energy storage system targets under California 
Assembly Bill (AB) 2514 at this time. 
Vice Mayor Burt expressed concern that staffing was not sufficient to support 
the City's ambitious climate goals. 
Council Member Stone felt climate action was a pressing concern and more 
urgency and immediacy were needed. 
Mayor DuBois inquired about the City's inability to obtain federal funding or 
tax benefits if it did not submit a storage plan.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
Ms. Perkins clarified that the City was required to investigate, not set, targets 
and was in compliance with the mandate.  In addition, funding was not tied to 
setting targets.   
Mayor DuBois inquired about the number of storage systems installed in Palo 
Alto. 
Ms. Perkins needed to provide that information at a later time, but she 
believed about 50 storage systems, including one at a commercial site, had 
been installed. 
Council Member Cormack noted there was an opportunity in the medium term 
for storage to make a difference.   
Council Member Tanaka believed storage was needed to enable more usage 
of renewable energy.  He encouraged Staff to consider nuclear energy. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-0, Filseth absent 
5. 
Approve the Workplan for Development of a Revenue-Generating Local 
Ballot Measure for the November 2022 General Election; Review and 
Potential Guidance to Staff on Affordable Housing Funding as Referred 
by the City Council. 
Administrative Services Director Kiely Nose reviewed the Council's discussion 
of a ballot measure in March 2020.  The current item was a discussion of 
potential measures for a Business Tax or other tax on the November 2022 
ballot.  Staff sought Council direction regarding the types of measures to 
explore, any preferred basis or unit of measure for a tax, and a work plan.  
The item also addressed a Council Priority, the Community and Economic 
Recovery Work Plan, and a referral regarding affordable housing funding.  
Staff presented the item to the Finance Committee in June 2021.  The Finance 
Committee recommended the Council approve the proposed work plan and 
consider a Business Tax based on square footage and a tax based on utility 
use.  The Finance Committee also suggested the Council discuss the revenue 
level that a Business Tax targeted, a metric for measurement or comparison, 
use of a utility-use based tax, and administrative burdens.   
Principal Management Analyst Steven Guagliardo reported the work plan 
through December 2021 included analysis of proposed taxes, refinement of 
revenue estimates, polling, and stakeholder outreach.  These efforts required 
augmented resources and a funding source.  Between January and August 
2022, additional outreach and polling were planned as well as drafting 
language for ballot measures.  The soonest Staff could implement a tax was 
January 2023.  He reviewed the requirements of a general and specific tax.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
Tax options were a Parcel Tax based on square footage, a Business Tax based 
on square footage, gross receipts, payroll, or headcount, and a tax based on 
utility use.  Businesses and occupations exempt from local business taxation 
were nonprofits, charitable organizations, banks and financial institutions, 
small residential care facilities, and small home childcare facilities.  Work on 
a Business Tax required the services of consultants and funding.  The Finance 
Committee preferred a tax based on square footage.  Using median data from 
nearby cities and data specific to Palo Alto, Staff calculated a tax measure 
based on revenue per capita, revenue per firm, and revenue per employee 
would generate $2.6 million, $4.2 million, and $7.2 million respectively.  
Potential uses of additional revenues included capital needs, service delivery, 
and City Council priorities.  Potential options for contributing to affordable 
housing were general taxes, inclusionary housing fees, commercial linkage 
fee, Jobs Housing Linkage Policy, Enhanced Infrastructure Financing District 
(EIFD), bond measures, and use of public land and/or land lease.   
Hamilton Hitchings supported a Business Tax based on office, research and 
development, and manufacturing square footage and utilized for affordable 
housing and transportation programs.  He also supported a utility tax utilized 
for restoration of programs cut at the onset of the pandemic with utility rates 
reduced by an amount equal to total tax revenue.   
Tiffany Griego, Stanford Research Park Managing Real Estate Director, 
encouraged the Council to actively include the business community in the 
evaluation of a Business Tax and development of a work plan.  If the Council 
selected a Business Tax, the Council needed to indicate the specific purpose 
and use of revenue and clarify the tax mechanism's relationship to the purpose 
of the tax.   
Charlie Weidanz requested the Council consider deferring a Business Tax as 
businesses continued to suffer from the pandemic.  If the Council chose to 
pursue a Business Tax, the Council should include business owners and 
leaders and other effected stakeholders in outreach and discussions.   
Dan Kostenbauder, Silicon Valley Leadership Group, shared the group's 
criteria for evaluating tax measures and asked to be included in any discussion 
of a Business Tax.   
Council Member Cormack noted that in 2020 the Council discussed utilizing 
additional revenue for grade separations and transportation initiatives.  The 
City's needs had changed and increased since 2020.  The Council was 
considering additional revenue of $10 million per year in 2020.  Thinking had 
evolved since March 2020 and shifted from head count to square footage as 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
the basis for a tax.  She inquired whether it was possible to conduct outreach 
with business groups prior to November 2021. 
Ms. Nose advised that the outreach timeframe was dependent on the Council's 
decision-making process.  The business community could provide meaningful 
feedback once the Council determined a metric or method.   
Council Member Cormack encouraged Council Members not to complicate the 
tax structure in an effort to gain support.  The Council should poll on utilizing 
a utility tax to replace revenue and to incorporate additional revenue. 
Council Member Burt indicated that voter support declined as the complexity 
of a tax increased.  Yet, some complexity was needed to ensure a fair tax.  
The Council needed information on all business taxes imposed by East Palo 
Alto and San Francisco.  East Palo Alto's businesses taxes did not deter office 
development. 
Mayor DuBois inquired regarding types of companies exempt from some taxes 
but not exempt from a Parcel Tax.   
Ms. Nose explained that a Parcel Tax was not regulated the same as a Business 
Tax, and the City had more discretion regarding the structure of a Business 
Tax.   
Mayor DuBois asked if medical businesses were exempt from a Parcel Tax. 
Ms. Nose needed time to research the issue. 
Mayor DuBois preferred a general tax in support of City services and capital 
needs.  Industry had shifted from products to services, and services did not 
generate Sales Tax.  A Business Tax should be based on square footage and 
apply to commercial only with a reduced or no rate for industrial, retail, and 
hospitality uses.  Square footage needed to be defined as all square footage 
to which a business had access and updated annually.  He wanted to 
understand community support for a payroll tax.  The revenue target should 
be $15 million to $25 million.  A metric could be $1 per square foot or 0.1 
percent for a payroll tax.  The utility tax should be described as voter approval 
of a practice that the Council wanted to reaffirm.   
Council Member Stone agreed that a Business Tax was needed, but a general 
tax may not be the best choice.  Many of the funds needed to be committed 
to priorities that the City was not able to accomplish.  Because obtaining voter 
approval of a special tax was difficult, he was amenable to learning more about 
general taxes.  A tax based on square footage was logical given the changing 
nature of work and a way to encourage less use of office space.  Not many 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
cities appeared to be utilizing a square footage basis.  He asked if Staff knew 
why Cupertino was attempting to move away from a square footage basis.   
Mr. Guagliardo suggested cities considered spreading the tax burden more 
evenly or differently among taxpayers when a few firms utilized a 
disproportionate amount of citywide square footage.   
Council Member Stone inquired whether Staff foresaw such a scenario in Palo 
Alto. 
Mr. Guagliardo answered no.   
Council Member Stone preferred a progressive tax, a revenue target of $15 
million to $25 million or higher, and including the business community in 
outreach.  The suggestions for affordable housing were great.  He supported 
community land trusts and noted the success of the model that London 
utilized. 
Council Member Kou inquired about applying a Parcel Tax to Stanford 
Research Park as it was owned by one entity. 
Ms. Nose advised that application of a Parcel Tax depended on the agreements 
between the owner and the lessees and sublessees.   
Council Member Kou asked if large apartment complexes were considered 
businesses. 
Ms. Nose indicated that Staff was going to evaluate that type of issue if the 
Council chose to pursue a Parcel Tax.  For a Parcel Tax, Staff needed to 
understand the County of Santa Clara's (County) categorization of land uses. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to understand the number of startups located 
in Palo Alto, the businesses that moved away from Palo Alto, vacant 
commercial spaces in Palo Alto, and reductions in the use of office space due 
to employees working from home.  Engaging the business community in 
discussions was important.  He questioned the party responsible for paying a 
Business Tax on vacant commercial space and whether a Business Tax was 
going to be imposed on a business whose employees worked from home.  The 
Council needed to determine the use of new revenue first and the amount 
second.  The City should not impose a Business Tax and provide compensation 
increases.  With the pandemic surging, work from home may not end soon.  
An apples-to-apples comparison of utility bills was needed before the Council 
considered a utility user tax. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt recalled 2016 and 2017 efforts to place a Business Tax 
measure on the 2018 ballot.  The scale of a Business Tax should be based on 
needs.  The business community opposed a Business Tax during the 2017 and 
2019 economic growth periods and was likely to oppose a Business Tax during 
economic declines.  Not investing in affordable housing and transportation 
undermined business growth.  More information about the legality of a payroll 
tax was needed.   
Council Member Cormack inquired about attributing a payroll tax to the 
jurisdiction in which employees resided rather than the jurisdiction in which 
the business was located. 
Ms. Nose advised that a Business Tax was applied to work performed within 
the boundaries of the jurisdiction imposing the Business Tax.  San Francisco 
moved away from a payroll tax for many reasons.   
Council Member Cormack recalled general agreement among Council Members 
in 2019 not to rely on a Documentary Transfer Tax because it was quite high 
and volatile.  Increasing the Documentary Transfer Tax with a surcharge and 
dedicating the revenue to affordable housing was an intriguing concept.  She 
proposed referring participation in the California Community Housing Agency 
(CalCHA) Joint Powers Authority (JPA) to the Policy and Services Committee 
(P&S).  One disadvantage of the program was that property taxes were not 
assessed on property accepted into the program.  Perhaps Council wished to 
set the boundaries of revenue generated by a tax. 
Mayor DuBois noted that an EIFD required the Council to freeze the current 
tax level and assign any incremental tax above that level to a particular use.  
He requested the advantages of using an EIFD. 
Ms. Nose related that bonding associated with an EIFD did not require voter 
approval.   
Mayor DuBois requested clarification of the CalCHA JPA. 
Ms. Nose explained that the City needed to join the joint partnership with the 
agency so that the agency was able to issue debt for property.  Benefits 
included a government interest rate on bonds and increased viability of 
affordable housing projects.   
Mayor DuBois asked if the City was required to pledge City assets for the bond. 
Ms. Nose replied no.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
Mayor DuBois inquired whether a jobs linkage fee replaced or complemented 
a commercial linkage. 
Mr. Guagliardo indicated it was a supplement.  Each one recognized the nexus 
between commercial development and its impacts on the City.  A commercial 
linkage was related to public infrastructure associated with the development, 
and the Jobs Housing Linkage Policy was related to the increased housing 
needs associated with the commercial development. 
Mayor DuBois asked if the existing affordable housing fee was a jobs housing 
linkage fee. 
Director of Planning and Development Services Jonathan Lait understood that 
they were different ways of approaching the same idea.  Council may want to 
direct Staff to investigate the concepts further. 
Mayor DuBois felt 2022 was the right time to impose a Business Tax to aid 
recovery.  A general tax could be used for transportation, affordable housing, 
policing, infrastructure, and other services.  He inquired about the difficulties 
San Francisco encountered with a payroll tax because the ease of enforcement 
was the greatest benefit of a payroll tax. 
City Attorney Molly Stump related that San Francisco amended its tax several 
times, and there were policy, legal, and administrability issues.  Staff needed 
to research the issues in order to respond comprehensively regarding the 
various factors.   
Mayor DuBois expressed concern about concurrently placing a Documentary 
Transfer Tax surcharge on the ballot.   
Council Member Stone suggested P&S engage with the state lobbyist to 
discuss modernizing laws for a payroll tax.  He requested any correlations 
between passage of one and more than one tax measure on a single ballot. 
Mr. Guagliardo reported ballot fatigue occurred, but the number of measures 
that triggered ballot fatigue was not known.   
Council Member Stone asked if polling was able to address ballot fatigue. 
Ms. Nose answered yes.   
Council Member Stone expressed disappointment with the lack of public 
comment regarding a tax measure to support affordable housing.  He 
supported the use of public land to mitigate the cost of affordable housing and 
encouraged Staff to advocate for State funding of affordable housing.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
Ms. Nose clarified that a special tax did not have to be scheduled for a general 
election. 
Council Member Stone inquired regarding the cost. 
Ms. Nose advised that the City was responsible for local election costs if there 
was not a shared election.   
Council Member Tanaka shared the factors for companies leaving Detroit.  He 
cautioned Council Members to consider a Business Tax carefully in an effort 
not to drive companies away from Palo Alto.   
Vice Mayor Burt commented that polling was going to be critical for informing 
decisions.  Because companies paid very little in local taxes, cities in the region 
were unable to respond to community needs.   
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to 
approve the workplan for the pursuit of a revenue-generating local ballot 
measure for the November 2022 General Election with the following focus: 
A. The pursuit of a business tax and the preference of square footage as the 
basis for such a tax;  
B. The pursuit of a utility use-based tax, and explore the option to incorporate 
revenue on climate adaptability;  
C. Proceed with the refinement of estimates and evaluation of potential tax 
measures—including stakeholder outreach, polling and further feasibility 
analysis—and bring forward the budget actions necessary;  
D. Review and accept additional information regarding affordable housing 
funding mechanisms, and refer to the Policy and Services Committee on 
the housing land trust, Jobs Housing Linkage Policy, and particularly with 
the CalCHA; and  
E. For the Finance Committee to discuss and recommend to the City Council 
the initial polling to inform whether one or more taxes may be feasible on 
the 2022 ballot, the support for different uses of revenue, the scale of the 
tax, the uses and needs informing the scale of tax, and the form of tax, as 
indicated in the staff report. 
Vice Mayor Burt did not want to limit the scale of the tax.  A tax that generated 
$30 million in revenue was not exorbitant.   
Mayor DuBois believed a Documentary Transfer Tax surcharge on higher-
priced properties was likely to pass on a primary or special election.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
Businesses were probably attracted to Palo Alto because of its proximity to 
Stanford University.   
Council Member Cormack noted that the Motion did not address the revenue 
level and inquired whether Staff could work without a specific level. 
Ms. Nose reported comments provided a range of $10 million to $30 million.  
That range was going to help Staff develop scenarios.   
Council Member Cormack reserved the right to object to larger revenue 
targets once Staff provided more information.   
Council Member Tanaka proposed amending the Motion to include the purpose 
and usage of tax revenues. 
Vice Mayor Burt related that the Finance Committee was going to flesh out the 
purpose and usage and make a recommendation to the Council.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if outreach was going to be targeted to 
companies that were likely to be impacted by a tax. 
Ms. Nose responded yes. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if Staff was doing to determine current rental 
rates for offices. 
Mayor DuBois noted the work plan included an analysis of taxes and 
structures.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if Staff planned to track employees working 
from home. 
Ms. Nose explained that Staff planned to work with the Finance Committee 
and Council on various analyses.  Staff may not have sufficient or the right 
data to track employees.  Staff intended to determine the best data sources 
and how to analyze issues.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether apples-to-apples comparisons of 
utility bills among cities were going to be part of Staff's analyses.   
Ms. Nose reported Staff would do their best to obtain the appropriate data to 
prepare accurate comparisons.   
MOTION PASSED/FAILED:  5-1, Tanaka no, Filseth absent 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 17 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/16/2021 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Vice Mayor Burt reported the Barron Park and Ventura neighborhoods were 
sponsoring a community event celebrating diversity on August 22, 2021.   
Closed Session 
6. 
CONFERENCE 
WITH 
REAL 
PROPERTY 
NEGOTIATORS 
Authority: 
Government 
Code 
Section 
54956.8  
Property: 300 Homer Avenue, Assessor’s Parcel Number 120-17-093  
Negotiating Party: Palo Alto History Museum 
ACTION:  Item was continued to August 23, 2021 City Council special 
meeting. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 9:33 P.M. 
