CITY COUNCIL  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 22 
Special Meeting 
March 8, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Participating Remotely:  Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
Special Orders of the Day 
1.
Proclamation 
Honoring 
Monique 
LeConge 
Ziesenhenne 
on 
her
Retirement.
Council Member Cormack read the Proclamation into the record.  
Mayor DuBois thanked Ms. Ziesenhenne for her many years of service and 
wished her well. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated Ms. Ziesenhenne making libraries a 
wonderful part of the community.   
Council Member Stone wished Ms. Ziesenhenne well in her retirement. 
Vice Mayor Burt noted Ms. Ziesenhenne was instrumental in moving libraries 
into the next generation. 
Council Member Kou thanked Ms. Ziesenhenne for the many enhancements to 
the library. 
Council Member Filseth thanked Ms. Ziesenhenne for her years of service and 
leading efforts to enhance libraries. 
Council Member Tanaka wished Ms. Ziesenhenne good luck in her future 
endeavors. 
Monique Le Conge Ziesenhenne thanked the Council and Staff for their hard 
work.  Her lengthy tenure with the City spoke to the quality and environment 
of the community.  She appreciated her role within the City of Palo Alto.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None. 
Oral Communications 
Anna Lembke opposed the applicant to change the zoning for property on 
Wellesley Street and urged the Council to create a long-term housing master 
plan.   
Angie Evans urged the Council to halt the eviction of recreational vehicles (RV) 
from El Camino Real.  On-street parking in the area was not highly utilized.  
Forcing RV dwellers to leave during a global pandemic was heinous.   
Kevin Ma called for the Council to issue an emergency moratorium on the 
issuance of tow warnings to RVs.  The intent of existing laws was to address 
abandoned vehicles.  Spending Staff time on citing RVs was not a good use of 
time.   
Raven Malone also opposed the eviction of RV dwellers during a pandemic and 
noted there was no place for them to go. 
Rohin Ghosh opposed any towing of RV dwellers.  Such an eviction was an act 
of violence by destroying the homes of the most vulnerable residents.  He 
questioned the point of towing RVs.   
Robert Chun felt the City was wrong to harass families living in RVs, especially 
during a pandemic.  The fees to reclaim a vehicle were prohibitively expensive 
for most families.  A moratorium on towing was needed. 
Rebecca Eisenberg noted many women and children lived in the RVs, and they 
were being harmed by the towing.  Castilleja School's dormitory was the 
perfect place for vehicle dwellers to live.  Quasi-judicial hearings were 
supposed to include only community members directly impacted. 
Chris Robell expressed concern regarding the budget of the County of Santa 
Clara Tax Assessor's Office.  The Tax Assessor was imposing unfair 
assessments that disproportionately affected new homeowners and people 
trying to get into homes.   
Kelsey Banes commended the Mayor's commitment to civil community 
discourse and hoped he contacted groups that he marginalized during his 
campaign.  The Safe Parking Ordinance did not provide for the enforcement 
of regulations on residents living in RVs.  Towing RVs destabilized families. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Nikhil opposed the towing of RVs.  The money spent to tow RVs was better 
spent on housing.   
Ella Jauregui suggested the City help the people living on El Camino rather 
than make their lives more difficult.   
Ebru Haritaoglu concurred with Mr. Ghosh's and Nikhil's comments.  The City 
needed to get its priorities straight. 
Aram James discussed a legal case regarding unhoused people.  The City was 
violating humanitarian principles.  Not a single church completed the process 
to become a safe parking location in more than a year.   
Minutes Approval 
2. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the February 22, 2021 City Council 
Meeting. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Burt to 
approve the Action Minutes for the February 22, 2021 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 4. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Burt, third 
by Council Member Stone to pull Agenda Item Number 5 to be heard on a date 
uncertain. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, advised that the item may be placed on the 
March 22, 2021 Agenda along with review of the Capital Improvement 
Program (CIP). 
Mark Mollineaux believed Oral Communications was inappropriately closed 
when speakers wished to address the Council.  More speakers wanted to 
address the towing of recreational vehicles (RV).   
Rebecca Eisenberg, addressing Agenda Items Number 3 and 4, suggested 
such a large contract amount was not appropriate for the Consent Calendar, 
especially in light of continuing Budget cuts.  Many companies provided better 
and more modern products at lower costs than SAP. 
Aram James concurred with Mr. Mollineaux's comments.  The Council needed 
to allow all public speakers time to address the Council without limiting the 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
time granted to each speaker.  Vice Mayor Burt and Council Members Tanaka 
and Stone needed to lead the Council. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 3 and 4. 
3. 
Approval of Contract Number C21178333 With Black & Veatch in an 
Amount Not-to-Exceed $3,182,960 to Provide Design Services for the 
Advanced Water Purification System (AWPS) at the Regional Water 
Quality 
Control 
Plant 
- 
Wastewater 
Treatment 
Fund 
Capital 
Improvement Program Project (WQ-19003). 
4. 
Approval of an Exemption to Competitive Solicitation Requirements for 
Contract Number C14151181 With SAP Public Service, Inc.; and 
Approval of an Amendment to Contract Number C14151181 With SAP 
Public Service, Inc. to Extend the Term for Five-years for Maintenance 
and Support of the ERP System for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of 
$1,586,512 and Approximately $317,300 Annually. 
5. 
Adoption of a Park Improvement Ordinance for Renovations at Ramos 
Park. 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 3:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 4:  6-1 Tanaka no 
Council Member Tanaka indicated exempting a contract from the bid process 
was not appropriate.  The contract did not cover support for customized 
modules.  Other companies provided support for customized and standard 
modules at lower costs. 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported notices were issued in compliance with 
State law that required vehicles to be moved every 72 hours.  The 
characterization of notices as eviction notices was not accurate.  The status of 
SAP contracts was going to be clarified in an informational item for the Council.  
The County of Santa Clara (County) moved into the red tier in which indoor 
activities were allowed at a limited capacity.  The Palo Alto Art Center 
reopened on March 6, 2021.  The State's Travel Advisory was in effect rather 
than the Public Health Officer's Mandatory Directive on Travel.  Staff was 
working with the County and healthcare providers to maximize the availability 
of COVID-19 vaccines in the region.  Vaccines were available for workers in 
education, childcare, emergency services, food, and agriculture.  COVID-19 
testing was available March 9, 16, 17, and 19, 2021.  The Uplift Local 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Community Check-in was scheduled for March 16, 2021.  Arbor, a new public 
art installation in King Plaza, was a visual interpretation of Palo Alto's urban 
forest.  Wellness Wednesdays was a new series focused on building 
community wellness and wellbeing and was scheduled to begin on March 17, 
2021.  Upcoming Council Agendas included action on the Castilleja School 
project, prescreening of a project at Town and Country Village, the Grand Jury 
report, Community and Economic Recovery Strategy, railroad grade 
separations, unhoused services, and selection of the Housing Element Working 
Group.   
Council Member Cormack inquired about utility workers wearing masks and 
the process to report workers not wearing masks. 
Mr. Shikada responded that utility workers were required to wear masks 
except in specific circumstances.  Members of the public needed to contact 
him with their concerns about workers not wearing masks. 
Action Items 
6. 
Temporary Ordinance 5517 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council of the 
City of Palo Alto Amending Title 18 (Zoning) of the Palo Alto Municipal 
Code to Broaden Permissible Uses and Raise Thresholds for Conditional 
Use Permits (CUP) for Some Land Uses Throughout the City.” 
Environmental Review: California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) 
Exemption 15061(b)(3) (FIRST READING: December 14, 2020 PASSED: 
7-0) (Continued From February 22, 2021). 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, recalled the 
Council's directions in November 2020 to modify requirements for retail uses.  
In January 2021, the Council removed the second reading of the Ordinance 
from the Consent Calendar and scheduled it for hearing tonight.  The proposed 
temporary Ordinance was scheduled to expire on June 30, 2022, and 
contained changes to definitions of uses, the Conditional Use Permit (CUP) 
requirement for medical uses, and uses allowed on California Avenue.  The 
proposed temporary Ordinance did not affect Retail Preservation Ordinance 
provisions.  The proposed temporary Ordinance allowed learning centers in 
the Downtown Ground Floor Combining District; personal services along 
California Avenue with restrictions; medical uses up to 5,000 square feet in 
the Neighborhood Commercial (CN) District; and gyms, yoga, fitness studies 
and medical uses in the Community Commercial (CC) and Service Commercial 
(CS) Districts with restrictions. 
Rebecca Eisenberg commented that neighborhood retail businesses greatly 
improved quality of life and promoted sustainability, social justice, and racial 
justice.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Dean Rubinson, Ellis Partners' Director of Development, expressed concern 
about the restaurant and retail distinction focusing on kitchen equipment 
because it was not relevant to parking.  He suggested the distinction be limited 
to locations where patrons ate on premises in their cars. 
Aram James requested the Council invite Black Lives Matter and the American 
Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) to participate in the April 5, 2021, Study Session. 
Hamilton Hitchings noted residents walked to neighborhood businesses, which 
helped the City reach its environmental goals.  He opposed the proposal to 
allow medical offices in CN Districts, especially on the ground floor.   
Winter Dellenbach remarked that brick-and-mortar businesses were expected 
to return in strength.  Personal services and medical offices belonged on side 
streets, not on main streets.   
Carol Scott requested the overarching vision for each particular area as the 
allowed uses seemed to be random.  As proposed, California Avenue appeared 
to be a food court and personal service area for office workers.   
Joe Spaulding indicated gyms helped people during hard times.  Increasing 
access to gyms was good for the community's health and wellness.   
Vice Mayor Burt requested clarification of the relationship between the existing 
Retail Preservation Ordinance and the proposed changes. 
Mr. Lait advised that the proposed temporary Ordinance did not introduce 
personal services and medical office uses in locations where they were not 
already allowed with the exception of beauty shops and nail salons on 
California Avenue.  The Retail Preservation Ordinance prohibited changing 
existing ground-floor retail and retail-like uses to any other use without the 
express consent of the Council.    
Vice Mayor Burt understood the definition of gym was changing to customized 
coaching, and gyms were going to be allowed on a greater square footage 
basis.  He inquired whether Staff considered restricting occupancy, and thus 
parking, rather than square footage. 
Mr. Lait explained that if a gym did not qualify as a personal services use, it 
was a commercial recreation use, which required a CUP.  The CUP was a 
method to restrict occupancy to address parking deficiencies, if any. 
Vice Mayor Burt commented that the increased square footage for a personal 
services use did not apply to a commercial recreation use.  Occupancy was 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
not the only method to distinguish a personal services use from a commercial 
recreation use.   
Mr. Lait wanted to talk with the Building Official to determine whether an 
occupancy restriction was a good way to limit floor area.   
Vice Mayor Burt expressed concern about the proposed expansion of uses on 
California Avenue, University Avenue, and to an extent in Town and Country 
Village.  Street-facing businesses on California Avenue and University Avenue 
needed to be true retail.  Other uses did not add to the retail environment.   
Council Member Stone inquired about the uses allowed in neighborhood 
shopping centers, for example Midtown Shopping Center. 
Mr. Lait related that the proposed temporary Ordinance allowed medical office 
uses to continue in the areas where they were allowed currently.  A medical 
office use was allowed in Midtown Shopping Center with a CUP, but perhaps 
not in Charleston Shopping Center.  Medical office uses on the ground floor 
were permitted by right in the Downtown area.   
Council Member Stone asked if a CUP was not required if the medical office 
use was less than 5,000 square feet. 
Mr. Lait replied yes.  The temporary Ordinance allowed medical office uses up 
to 5,000 square feet without a CUP in areas where they were currently 
allowed.  In the Midtown Shopping Center, medical office uses were limited to 
2,500 square feet.   
Council Member Stone preferred not to allow medical office uses in CN Districts 
so that people were able to walk to shopping and dining.  He inquired whether 
a medical office use was allowed to occupy a vacant commercial space 
formerly occupied by a retail use. 
Mr. Lait clarified that a commercial space occupied by a retail use as of the 
date of the Retail Preservation Ordinance was not allowed to convert to 
another use.   
Council Member Stone inquired whether the length of a use's occupancy was 
limited, if the occupancy was established prior to the sunset date of the 
proposed temporary Ordinance. 
Mr. Lait replied no. 
Council Member Stone requested the rationale for utilizing kitchen equipment 
to define a restaurant use.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Mr. Lait noted Council's December 2020 direction to Staff included a 
comprehensive analysis of retail and retail-like uses throughout the City.  This 
analysis was an opportunity for Staff to consider Mr. Rubinson's comments.  
In the meantime, the proposed definition was sufficient for Staff to navigate 
any issues. 
Council Member Kou asked if there was a restriction on the type of medical 
office. 
Mr. Lait advised that existing definitions distinguished three or four types of 
medical office uses.  The proposed temporary Ordinance did not change those 
definitions or the type of medical uses permitted in any district.   
Council Member Kou asked if the City Clerk was responsible for reminding 
Staff of the Ordinance's expiration date, June 30, 2022. 
Mr. Lait explained that the City Clerk was responsible for updating the 
Municipal Code if the Council adopted the temporary Ordinance.  The Planning 
and Development Services Department, City Attorney's Office, and City Clerk's 
Office tracked temporary Ordinances. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether a new commercial tenant received 
notice of the expiration date when applying for a business license. 
Mr. Lait clarified that a use's occupancy of a commercial space did not expire 
with the temporary Ordinance.   
Council Member Cormack recalled that the Council unanimously supported the 
first reading of the temporary Ordinance.  People were buying services rather 
than goods.  She was not interested in discouraging gyms and nail salons.  
With the number of vacant commercial spaces and the shift in purchases, this 
was an opportunity to try something new.  Locating appropriate medical 
services in neighborhoods allowed residents to walk to medical appointments.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the current vacancy rate. 
Mr. Lait did not have the information. 
Council Member Tanaka felt the vacancy rate was high.  Vacancies were bad 
for Downtown.  Staff needed to track the vacancy rate closely.  With the new 
take-out model for restaurants, perhaps reduced parking requirements were 
appropriate.  Personal services created foot traffic that supported retailers.  
Maybe the Council wanted to consider lifting restrictions on chain stores and 
restaurants to fill vacant spaces.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Mayor DuBois asked what would be allowed for gyms at Midtown Shopping 
Center. 
Mr. Lait reported a gym as a personal service was capped at 3,000 square feet 
in Midtown Shopping Center.   
Mayor DuBois requested the differences among extensive retail, intensive 
retail, and take-out service.   
Mr. Lait explained that intensive retail needed a good amount of foot traffic.  
Extensive retail, such as a furniture store, needed less foot traffic.   
Mayor DuBois asked if intensive retail was clusters of retailers. 
Mr. Lait responded no.  In extensive retail, a large amount of floor area was 
dedicated to displays.   
Mayor DuBois asked how extensive and intensive applied to take-out food 
uses. 
Mr. Lait indicated that a retail food service use, such as a sandwich shop, was 
characterized by orders placed at a window or counter, food eaten on or off 
premises, and customers choosing the shop because they were in the area.  A 
full-service restaurant was characterized by service at a table with a menu 
and customers choosing the restaurant more as a destination.  The definition 
of take-out service was sometimes a problem because it blended into retail 
food service uses that did not want to comply with the 1:30 parking 
requirement for take-out service.   
Mayor DuBois suggested Staff clean up the definitions for food service uses. 
Mr. Lait clarified that the proposed Ordinance delineated that an intensive 
retail food service use was not a take-out food use. 
Mayor DuBois agreed with protecting retail and retail-like services and paying 
attention to main streets and concentrated shopping areas.  He opposed gym 
and medical uses in main shopping areas.  The availability of COVID-19 
vaccines was different now than in December 2020 when the Council approved 
the first reading. 
Council Member Kou stated the Council needed to plan changes for coming 
out of the recession.  She did not support the Staff recommendation. 
Vice Mayor Burt commented that the first reading was rushed in order to 
respond to changes, and the Council did not have time to consider all aspects 
of the proposed changes. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Mayor DuBois to adopt the 
attached temporary Ordinance with the following exceptions: 
A. 
Prohibit allowing nail salons, beauty shops, barber shops, etc. directly 
on California Avenue street facing;  
B. 
On University Avenue, California Avenue, as well as Town and Country, 
prohibit the expansion of gyms greater than 1,800 square feet, and refer 
this to Planning and Transportation Commission for additional review;  
C. 
Prohibit the expansion of tutoring, schools, and related functions on the 
main streets of Downtown and California Avenue;  
D. 
Allow the change to commercial recreation to go forward, but also direct 
the Planning and Transportation Commission to look at occupancy for 
personal services that are commercial recreation; 
E. 
Refer to the Planning and Transportation Commission the evaluation of 
the 
most 
appropriate 
way 
to 
define 
restrictions 
on 
dining 
establishments;  
F. 
Prohibit expansion of the permissible medical sizes on the main 
shopping streets of California Avenue, University Avenue and Midtown 
Shopping Center. 
Vice Mayor Burt believed the objective of the temporary Ordinance was to 
support local retail and retail-like services.  Uses that paid higher lease rates 
but did not support the retail environment were a detriment to existing 
retailers.   
Mayor DuBois inquired whether the intent of the Motion was clear to Staff. 
Mr. Lait interpreted the Motion as the increase from 1,800 to 5,000 square 
feet for gyms was acceptable except on California Avenue and in Town and 
Country Village.   
Vice Mayor Burt noted the exception included University Avenue. 
Mr. Lait reported gyms were not allowed on University Avenue under the 
current regulations.  He inquired whether the intention was to allow gyms of 
1,800 square feet or less on California Avenue or to prohibit gyms entirely on 
California Avenue.  Currently, gyms of 1,800 square feet were allowed on 
California Avenue.   
Vice Mayor Burt intended to maintain that regulation. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Mr. Lait reiterated that 1,800 square feet was the rule for gyms on California 
Avenue and Town and Country Village, but 5,000 square feet was the rule 
elsewhere. 
Mayor DuBois understood Parts B, C, and F were intended to continue the CUP 
requirements on University Avenue, California Avenue, and the shopping 
centers, Midtown Shopping Center specifically, and to allow the expansion in 
areas off main streets. 
Vice Mayor Burt indicated other changes in the temporary Ordinance applied 
to those areas.  That was the reason for carving these out specifically.   
Mr. Lait asked if a CUP was still required in the areas mentioned in Part F. 
Vice Mayor Burt answered yes.   
Mr. Lait noted medical was a permitted use in Downtown.  A medical office 
use was not allowed to replace an existing retail or retail-like use on University 
Boulevard.  Therefore, a CUP was going to be needed for medical in California 
Avenue and Midtown where medical was already an authorized use.  Where 
medical office was allowed by right, it was not going to change.   
Council Member Cormack inquired about the remaining provisions of the 
temporary Ordinance once the Motion was applied. 
Mr. Lait reported definition changes remained.  Medical was allowed by right 
in some parts of the City. 
Council Member Cormack noted that Council Members expressed a wish to 
change some definitions. 
Mayor DuBois clarified that everything except main streets was left.   
Mr. Lait advised that a lot of valuable aspects of the temporary Ordinance 
remained to move forward.  The Motion proposed policy changes.   
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff rather than the Planning and 
Transportation Commission (PTC) needed to conduct the evaluation in Part F. 
Mr. Lait related that Staff was going to address the evaluation with the other 
items referred to the PTC. 
Council Member Cormack did not support the Motion. 
Council Member Kou felt the Motion was a wise strategy for economic 
recovery.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Council Member Stone remarked that short-term fixes were often a detriment 
to long-term planning.  When the economy returned, the Council was not 
going to support core shopping areas filled with medical offices and gyms.   
Vice Mayor Burt advised that the Motion liberalized allowed uses in extensive 
areas of the City.  The Motion prevented drastic changes to the City's main 
streets. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Motion or the proposed Ordinance was 
most likely to help fill vacant commercial spaces.   
Mr. Lait understood the intent was to balance changes with the vision for 
commercial areas.  The temporary Ordinance's changes were discrete because 
Staff did not have time to conduct an extensive analysis.  The Motion was 
likely to work on the margins by addressing retail food service uses and 
medical uses.   
Council Member Tanaka wanted to be more aggressive and to move faster in 
order to help and attract businesses.  He inquired whether Staff planned to 
monitor vacancy rates. 
Mr. Lait answered yes, but the data was probably going to be incomplete.   
MOTION PASSED:  5-2 Cormack, Tanaka no 
Council took a break at 7:12 P.M. and returned at 7:18 P.M. 
7. 
PUBLIC HEARING/QUASI JUDICIAL: 1310 Bryant Street (Castilleja): 
Consideration of Certification of an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) 
and Applications for a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) Amendment to 
Increase the Student Enrollment up to 540 Students; a Variance to 
Replace Campus Gross Floor Area; and Architectural Review of Campus 
Redevelopment. On March 8, 2021, the Council Will Receive 
Presentations and Public Testimony; the Item Will be Continued to 
March 15, 2021 for Council Deliberation and Action - No Public 
Testimony Will be Heard on March 15, 2021.  Zone District: R-1 
(10,000). Environmental Review: Final Environmental Impact Report 
(EIR) Published July 30, 2020; Draft EIR Published July 15, 2019. 
Vice Mayor Burt disclosed meetings with a group of Castilleja School parents 
and alumni, Castilleja's head of school, Castilleja's chief operating officer, and 
a number of neighborhood representatives.  He was not aware of receiving 
information that was not part of the public record. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Council Member Cormack disclosed a meeting with two members of Castilleja's 
leadership staff in 2018, a meeting with the Preserve Neighborhood Quality of 
Life (PNQL) group in August 2018, an individual meeting with a neighbor in 
October 2020, a Zoom meeting with a group of Castilleja supporters on 
October 20, 2020, a meeting with a member of Castilleja's Board of Trustees 
on October 27, 2020, and a Zoom meeting with PNQL on January 15, 2021.  
She was not aware of receiving any information that was not part of the public 
record. 
Mayor DuBois disclosed meetings with Castilleja supporters and parents and 
concerned neighbors several years ago.  He believed information submitted to 
the Council via email was part of the public record. 
Council Member Filseth disclosed a meeting with neighbors opposed to 
Castilleja's expansion in 2018 but no meetings since then.  He was not aware 
of any information that was not part of the public record. 
Council Member Kou disclosed meetings with Castilleja supporters, parents of 
former, current, and future students, Castilleja trustees, Castilleja's 
headmistress and chief operating officer, a number of neighbors, and PNQL.  
She was not aware of any information that was not part of the public record. 
Council Member Stone disclosed meetings with representatives of Castilleja in 
2016 and January 2021 and project proponents and opponents.  He was not 
aware of any information that was not part of the public record. 
Council Member Tanaka disclosed multiple meetings during his office hours, 
telephone conversations, and a meeting with a PNQL member.  He was not 
aware of any information that was not part of the public record. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, reported Staff 
attempted to understand the Applicant's project objectives and community 
members' concerns throughout the application process.  The subterranean 
parking facility was not clearly addressed in local regulations and, as 
proposed, required Zoning Code interpretations.  The Planning and 
Transportation Commission (PTC) was divided on this issue.  Staff sought 
Council's guidance regarding the parking facility.  The at-places memorandum 
provided the Council with new information, which did not significantly impact 
the project but was substantively important and required some redesign and 
adjustments to application findings.   
Amy French, Chief Planning Official, advised that the Applicant, Castilleja 
School Foundation, sought approval to redevelop the campus and expand 
enrollment to 540 students.  Castilleja last received a use permit in 2006.  The 
historic building on campus was attached to the 1960 Rhoades Hall.  The 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Applicant proposed a significant separation between the historic building and 
the new classroom building.  The project included retaining and improving 
historic buildings and the gym; demolishing five older buildings; building a 
new academic building; building a new 78-space subterranean parking facility; 
relocating the pool from at-grade to below-grade; updating circulation; 
removing 18 trees including three protected trees; planting 99 new native 
trees; and installing new landscaping and fences.  The Architectural Review 
Board (ARB) held three public hearings on the project.  The Historic Resources 
Board (HRB) reviewed the project for compliance with Secretary of the Interior 
Standards.  The PTC held five public hearings.  The proposed parking facility 
was intended to direct more circulation activity onsite for student drop off and 
pick up, to reduce parking in the neighborhood, to reduce noise, and to enable 
onsite parking for events.  The proposed garage's entry was a two-lane, one-
way ramp from the Bryant Street lot and exit was a one-lane ramp to 
Emerson.  The garage wall was adjusted to preserve a stand of redwood trees.  
Single-family residential (R-1) zoning prohibited below-grade parking for 
residential uses.  A subterranean parking facility was akin to a basement; 
however, a basement was defined as being located under a building.  The 
Zoning Code exempted non-habitable area from the calculation of floor area 
ratio (FAR).  Below-grade floor area did not count toward gross floor area in 
the R-1 zone and did not contribute to FAR.  The FAR standard was intended 
to help manage building mass and bulk.  Community concerns included Zoning 
Code interpretations, enrollment, enforcement of the Transportation Demand 
Management (TDM) program, number and frequency of events, and impacts 
to existing trees and tree canopy.  The existing Conditional Use Permit (CUP) 
allowed a maximum enrollment of 415 students.  Currently, 426 students were 
enrolled.  The Applicant proposed increasing enrollment to 490 after 
completion of the garage and 540 after completion of all construction with a 
maximum annual increase of 25 students.  A majority of PTC Commissioners 
accepted an enrollment of 540 students but proposed to limit vehicle trips 
through an aggressive TDM plan.  Dissenting PTC Commissioners proposed a 
maximum enrollment of 450 students in an effort to restore community trust.  
The TDM plan proposed no net new AM peak trips and no net new average 
daily trips (ADT).  The City had the authority to suspend or reduce student 
enrollment and impose financial penalties for violating the CUP.  Castilleja's 
special events supported its academic mission and the campus experience.  
The Applicant proposed 90 events during an academic year with an event 
defined as one with more than 50 attendees.  The PTC supported a maximum 
of 74 events and limited attendees at major events to 500.  The Applicant 
proposed 14 tree removals, 28 tree relocations, and 90 new trees.  Four trees 
were already removed, and nine replacement trees were to be planted onsite.  
Staff proposed conditions of approval to protect three trees near construction 
activity.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Katherine Waugh, Dudek, indicated the PTC and HRB reviewed the Draft 
Environmental Impact Report (DEIR).  The Final Environmental Impact Report 
(FEIR) contained public comments and master responses.  The DEIR listed 
significant impacts, mitigation measures that reduced those impacts to less 
than significant, and three significant and unavoidable impacts related to 
traffic.  The Applicant proposed a project alternative that reduced the size of 
the garage, provided three drop-off and pick-up locations, avoided all three 
significant and unavoidable impacts, and reduced the amount of tree removal.  
The proposed site plan and below-grade pool were going to reduce noise from 
outdoor events.   
Public Hearing opened at 7:59 P.M. 
Nancy Kauffman, Head of Castilleja School, Applicant, reported for more than 
100 years Castilleja had been part of Palo Alto's educational fabric.  The 
project was revised multiple times in response to community, ARB, HRB, and 
PTC input.  Experts found that the campus was able to accommodate 540 
students without increasing vehicle trips.  Proposed conditions of approval 
prohibited Castilleja from increasing enrollment if vehicle trips increased.  A 
1965 document clarified Castilleja's vested campus square footage.  
Consequently, the Applicant was willing to reduce the proposed square footage 
by 5 percent and hoped the change was referred to only the ARB 
subcommittee for review.   
Adam Woltag, WRNS Studio, Architect, noted that the site was connected to 
the Embarcadero Corridor and embedded in an established residential 
neighborhood.  The homes around the campus inspired the project design.  
Except for the pool, the proposed academic building adhered to the footprint 
of the existing buildings.  The landscape was designed to reflect and respect 
the palette of the neighborhood.   
Ashni Sheth remarked regarding the accomplishments of Castilleja students. 
Areli Hernandez appreciated the all-girl environment of Castilleja and the 
benefits of attending an all-girl school.   
Sarahi Cordero appreciated the opportunities Castilleja offered and hoped to 
extend those opportunities to other girls.   
Natya Chandrasekar wanted more girls to experience the diversity and 
camaraderie of Castilleja.   
Alexis Stull shared her experiences in the Diversity Club at Castilleja.  Allowing 
more students increased diversity and student representation. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Leila Moncharsh, PNQL attorney, speaking for Wally Whittier (Gwen Whittier), 
Suzanne Keehn, Paula Powar, Valerie Milligan, and Chris Stone, indicated the 
project was too aggressive for the size of the site and the location in a 
residential neighborhood.  The numbers for square footage were unreliable.  
The underground garage had to be included in the gross floor area.  Denying 
the variance and reducing the size of the project solved many problems.  The 
tree canopy shown in the renderings required decades to evolve.   
Andie Reed, speaking for Terry Holzemer, Kathy Croce, Joe Rolfe, Elaine 
Meyer, Lucia Ugarte, and Neilson Buchanan, commented that the size and 
scope of the expansion were overly ambitious.  The project was extremely 
dense for a residential neighborhood.  Castilleja's enrollment exceeded the 
allowed enrollment for many years.  The proposed garage was going to 
provide only 22 additional parking spaces.  The square footage of the proposed 
garage needed to be added to the floor area because it was not a basement.   
Jeff Levinsky, speaking for Patricia Wong, David Quigley, Chris Robell, Chuck 
Karish, Fred Balin, and Christian Pease, discussed the definition and 
regulations for basement.  Castilleja's garage was not a basement and needed 
to be counted as floor area.  If the Council granted an FAR of 0.41 to Castilleja, 
it had to do the same for all 8,000 R-1 parcels.  The Council was not allowed 
to consider the personal circumstances of the property owner. 
Mary Sylvester, speaking for Jo Ann Mandanich, Annette Ross, Paul Machado, 
Bill Schmarzo, and Winter Dellenbach, noted that the EIR contained grave 
oversights and faulty analyses.  The project added 300 cars per day to traffic.  
Castilleja students and faculty needed to utilize shuttles, public transportation, 
and active transportation.  The disbursed circulation plan was unsafe for 
bicyclists, motorists, and pedestrians.  The underground garage was going to 
attract traffic.   
Lisa Van Dusen, speaking for Kim Monsalve, Tiffany Silva, Danny Kwok, Stacy 
Molano, and Megan Parker, stated the project was a compromise of Castilleja's 
needs and the community's desires.  The project benefited the community and 
the region by providing educated women for the workforce and leaders for the 
world. 
Roger McCarthy, speaking for Charles Stevens, Ann DeHovitz, Amy Asin, Kley 
Gilbuena, and Elke Teichman, indicated that the project created no 
substantive impacts.  No one noticed that Castilleja exceeded its enrollment 
limit until Castilleja announced it.  The proposal complied with tree guidelines.   
Mayor DuBois announced Agenda Item Number 8 was continued to the 
March 15, 2021 meeting. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Trisha Suvari, speaking for Mark Sue, Dawn Um, Khoa Do, Donna Do, and 
Joeanne Voet, commented that the underground garage and enrollment 
increases were not going to increase traffic.  Construction was phased so that 
it affected half the neighborhood at a time.  Five years was needed for 
Castilleja to reach maximum enrollment.  The project created no impacts.  
One-quarter to one-third of students lived in Palo Alto.   
Rob Levitsky, speaking for Laura Kwong, Angie Heile, Pius Fisher, David Pitt, 
and Aron Beller, related that the project plans did not accurately represent 
trees on the site.  Construction of the parking garage was probably going to 
kill trees.   
Dave Dockter, speaking for Jack Boffa, Andrew Berger, Bruce Kang, Elani 
Gitterman, and Daniel Virtheim, advised that Staff's new interpretation of the 
Tree Ordinance allowed the indiscriminate removal of any protected tree 
located within the buildable area of R-1 properties.  Castilleja utilized the 
flawed interpretation to justify the removal of trees from its property.  Staff 
utilized a provision applicable to vacant property.  Castilleja's site was not 
vacant.  The latest plans contained new protection measures, but the risk of 
mortality was high for individual at-risk trees.  The standard condition of 
approval regarding the appraised value of at-risk trees was omitted from the 
Record of Land Use Action (RLUA).   
Hank Sousa stated neighbors supported an enrollment limit of less than 450 
students, removal of the parking garage, and implementation of shuttle 
service for students. 
Eduardo Llach commented that Palo Alto High School grew 33 percent while 
Castilleja grew only 5 percent over the past 18 years.  Since Castilleja 
announced its enrollment exceeded the cap, it complied with every detail of 
the enrollment deduction schedule and reduced vehicle trips.   
Hamilton Hitchings asked the Council to limit Castilleja's enrollment at 450 
students and to remove the garage. 
Tom Shannon questioned the limits of growth provided by a CUP.  The 
neighborhood's infrastructure did not grow over the past 60 years; yet, 
Castilleja's impact dramatically increased.  He asked the Council to impose 
on-street parking restrictions and require implementation of shuttle service. 
Stewart Raphael urged the Council to support Castilleja's application.  An 
increase in enrollment was not going to increase the number of motorists.  The 
TDM plan mitigated traffic impacts. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Barbara Hazlett supported Castilleja's application.  Castilleja was a respectful 
neighbor and planned to be audited for compliance with the CUP.  She 
preferred an underground parking facility to a parking lot.   
Becky Sanders believed the project was going to affect development across 
the City and requested the Council deny the application. 
Alan Cooper suggested neighbors' requests take precedence over Castilleja's 
requests.  He commended Staff for requiring no net new trips.  A reward 
system benefited and encouraged real traffic reductions. 
Roy Maydan supported Castilleja's application because the square footage was 
the same, Castilleja was a nonprofit school, the project created no impacts, 
and events were reduced.   
Nancy Tuck noted the traffic issue arose after Castilleja announced it exceeded 
the enrollment cap.  Enforcement of the TDM plan was comprehensive.  The 
underground garage removed surface parking and allowed more landscaping.   
Anu and Sudhanshu Priyadarshi supported the application, increased 
enrollment, and the underground garage. 
Parag Patel advised that Castilleja was established prior to the area being 
zoned R-1.  Mitigation measures included traffic management, tree 
replacement, and underground parking.   
Priya believed Castilleja was a point of pride for Palo Alto, and the school and 
girls deserved the City's and the community's support. 
Cindy Chen supported increasing enrollment as long as car trips did not 
increase.  Noise from special events was not a concern.   
Bill Burch supported Castilleja's proposed project.  He recommended the 
Council consider whether the project benefited the community and reflected 
the community's values.   
Sulev Suvari noted Castilleja's events were not scheduled on Sunday and 
ended by 10:00 p.m. on other days.  He urged the Council to support 
Castilleja's proposal. 
Maya Blumenfeld supported Castilleja's expansion in order to provide 
opportunities for more girls and to improve facilities. 
Jim Fitzgerald reiterated Castilleja's intention to replace existing building 
square footage only.  The PTC supported the intention.  ARB review of the 
alternate proposal was appropriate.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Yair Blumenfeld felt the underground parking garage was going to benefit the 
neighborhood.  Conditions of approval required Castilleja to enhance its TDM 
program.  The FEIR and Comprehensive Plan favored below-grade parking 
over surface parking lots.  The Zoning Code permitted below-grade parking 
for nonresidential uses. 
Jason Stinson did not understand neighbors' complaints when they purchased 
their homes with knowledge of the school.  Castilleja's events were essential 
to its functioning.  He opposed the proposal to reduce events. 
Greg Sands commented that Castilleja was the only non-sectarian, all-girls, 
6-12 school in Northern California.  Castilleja was a community resource for 
nonprofit agencies and local girls.   
Sujata Kadambi supported the expansion project so that more girls attended 
Castilleja.  The project was not going to affect the community.   
Kyle Bordeau appreciated Castilleja revising the project to respond to 
comments.   
Daniel Garber remarked that educational institutions underpinned property 
values and imparted the City's values to students.  He supported the Staff 
recommendation and urged the Council to move the application forward. 
Catherine Garber supported the application.  Castilleja's existing structures 
did not enhance the neighborhood and needed updating.   
Glowe Chang supported the project as a way to further the social, emotional, 
and academic growth of students.   
Carla Befera clarified that neighbors were concerned about traffic and parking 
prior to Castilleja announcing it exceeded the enrollment cap.  Castilleja 
ignored the complaints until it wanted to expand the campus.  She suggested 
the Council allow modest growth while Castilleja proved it maintained no net 
new vehicle trips.   
Chi Wong opposed the project because Castilleja violated its CUP and, yet, 
requested a significant increase and a significant variance.   
Bill Ross recommended the Council remand the project to the PTC for an 
objective review of the FEIR.  Commissioner Alcheck had a conflict of interest 
and bias but did not recuse himself from discussion of the FEIR.   
Kimberly Wong related a history of neighbors' interaction with Castilleja and 
urged the Council not to certify the FEIR as it did not address neighbors' 
concerns.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Cathy Williams supported the application because of the compromises 
Castilleja made and the lack of impacts on close neighbors. 
Aram James felt Council Members spent more time conferring with Castilleja 
staff and alumni than with neighbors.  Thus, the Council was not a fair jury.  
He suggested Castilleja sell the property to the City and purchase a larger 
property, and the City convert the campus to a Black educational cultural 
center with low-income housing for African-Americans and rename it in honor 
of Sojourner Truth and Frederick Douglas. 
Bruce McLeod recommended the Council direct the Engineering Department 
to study all options for traffic access to the campus from Embarcadero Road 
prior to approval of a CUP.  The PTC needed to review and approve a 
comprehensive construction plan that protected both students and neighbors.  
The proposed parking garage did not provide parking for Castilleja staff.  The 
site was woefully undersized for the current student population, and increased 
density should not be allowed.   
Teresa Kelleher stated Castilleja's alternative project surpassed the City's goal 
of reducing greenhouse gas emission 80 percent by 2030 and added other 
features for a sustainable future.  The project proposed 50 percent more trees.   
Peter Levin disagreed with opposing the project based on Castilleja students 
not being residents of Palo Alto.  Castilleja was an important part of the diverse 
community.  He supported the project. 
Jeffery Hook felt the project was staggeringly complex and unnecessary.  
Intensifying development in Palo Alto at this time was not the way to support 
women's education.  He opposed the project and preferred something simple. 
Jim Poppy opposed the underground garage because it was going to release 
huge amounts of greenhouse gases and compromise a crucial piece of bicycle 
infrastructure.  Castilleja admitted that the project generated at least 400 new 
car trips per day plus events.   
Nelson Ng indicated that labeling the underground garage as a basement was 
giving businesses in single-family neighborhoods more rights than residents.  
This was one of many decisions about this project that led to dangerous 
precedents.  He urged the Council to question any decision that did not benefit 
and preserve the quality of life of all residents. 
Yanting Zhang advised that Project Alternative Number 4 was a positive plan 
to bring together the best of the school and neighbors.  Castilleja planned to 
salvage material from existing structures.  She welcomed the new building 
and improvements to the campus.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Diane Rolfe opposed the project because it was poorly designed and highly 
controversial.  Castilleja wished to increase enrollment to 90 students per 
acre, which was two to three times the density of any other public or private 
school on the Peninsula.   
Lesley King appreciated the PTC's careful analysis of the project.  Enrollment 
was irrelevant as long as there were no negative impacts.  The proposed 
enrollment of 540 students was intended to build strong sports teams, musical 
ensembles, and theatre productions.  She asked the Council to approve the 
project. 
Lama Rimawi appreciated Castilleja's thoughtful tree plan, which substantially 
increased the number of trees on campus and complied with Palo Alto's Tree 
Technical Manual. 
Matt Glickman supported the expansion of Castilleja's campus but not as 
proposed.  Traffic impacts were too great.  If the neighbors and Castilleja held 
good faith discussions, workable solutions were likely to emerge. 
Neva Yarkin remarked that increased enrollment and the proposed parking 
garage were going to lead to more traffic congestion and adverse impacts to 
the Bryant bicycle boulevard.   
Roy Wang supported Castilleja and its plan.  The underground structure was 
a good solution to concerns about traffic, parking, and noise.   
Patama Gur disagreed with comments that Castilleja increased traffic 
congestion.  The underground facility was a gift to the neighborhood.  The 
project was environmentally superior and created no unavoidable and 
significant impacts to the community.   
Jack Morton opposed the project because it killed trees, violated R-1 zoning, 
and greatly increased density.   
Deborah Goldeen concurred with Ms. Van Dusen's and Mr. McCarthy's 
comments.  The proposed increase in enrollment was actually modest.   
Richard Purkey commented that the proposed intensity of development was 
too great for the site.  With no increase in enrollment, the underground garage 
was not necessary. 
Joe Spaulding suggested the Council rezone the area to R-4 and approve the 
project.   
Jochen Profit urged the Council to approve the proposed project without 
changes.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 22 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/08/2021 
Kerry Yarken wanted to know the current Council's position on the previous 
Council's and Planning Manager's statement regarding enrollment above 415 
students.  The property was too small to adequately support 540 students.   
Rebecca Eisenberg related that Castilleja had no legal right to operate a school 
on property zoned R-1.  Castilleja willfully violated the terms of its CUP.   
Carolyn Schmarzo encouraged the Council to enforce R-1 zoning and 
recognize residents' investments in Palo Alto.   
Lian Bi supported Castilleja's project and the underground parking facility.  
The FEIR noted that the underground facility promoted bicycle safety along 
the bike boulevard.   
David Schrom recommended the Council deny the application, enforce existing 
enrollment limits and zoning, and invite the Applicant to submit a plan that 
complied with both. 
Tony Hughes advised that education was a huge part of what made Palo Alto 
special.  Many of the neighborhood impacts were created by Palo Alto High 
School rather than Castilleja.   
Mindie Romanowski, Applicant, hoped the Council sorted fact from fiction.  
There was ample support to approve the legal findings required for the CUP 
and variance as analyzed by the EIR, HRB, ARB, and PTC.  The Municipal Code 
did not prohibit the proposed parking facility, which was an accessory facility 
that supported a conditional use.  Castilleja did compromise and redesign the 
project.  Claims of incorrect tree diagrams were false.  Members of the 
community supported the project and voiced that support.   
Public Hearing closed at 12:00 A.M. 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
8. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Finance Committee Recommends the City Council 
Approve the Park, Community, and Library Development Impact Fee 
Justification Study; Approve Adjustments to Park, Community Center, 
and Library Development Impact Fees; Adopt an Ordinance Updating 
Park Land In-lieu fees; and Direct Staff to Implement the Impact Fee 
Updates With the Fiscal Year 2022 Budget. 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
None. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 12:01 A.M. 
