CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 35 
Special Meeting 
June 22, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:03 P.M. 
Participating Remotely:  Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None. 
Oral Communications 
Katie Rueff requested the Council's support for the Energy Innovation and 
Carbon Dividend Act, which encouraged affordable clean health, promoted 
public health, and benefited Americans financially. 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Tanaka registered no votes on Agenda Item Numbers 2 and 
5. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack 
to approve Agenda Item Numbers 1-5. 
1. 
Approval 
of 
Construction 
Contract 
Number 
C21178601A 
With 
Azulworks, Inc. in the Amount of $1,954,900; Authorization for the 
City Manager to Negotiate and Execute Change Orders up to a Not-to-
Exceed Amount of $195,490 for the Rinconada Park Improvement 
Project, Capital Improvement Program Project PE-08001; and Approval 
of Budget Amendments in the Stormwater Management Fund and the 
Capital Improvement Fund. 
2. 
Approval of a Lease Agreement With BioScience Properties for the 
Regional Water Quality Control Plant Workspace at 1900 Embarcadero 
Road in the Estimated Total Amount of $1.73 Million for a Period of 
Five-years; and Approval of a Fiscal Year 2022 Budget Amendment in 
the Wastewater Treatment Fund. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
3. 
Approval of: 1) Construction Contract With O'Grady Paving, Inc. in the 
Amount of $6,688,253 and Authorization for the City Manager to 
Negotiate and Execute Change Orders up to a Not-to-Exceed Amount 
of $668,825; 2) Contract Amendment Number 4 to Contract 
C14150694 With Mark Thomas and Company in the Amount of 
$27,136; and 3) Resolution 9977 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of 
the City of Palo Alto for Senate Bill 1, the Road Repair and 
Accountability Act for Fiscal Year 2022, Providing the Project List for 
the Charleston-Arastradero Corridor Project – Phase 3, Capital 
Improvement Program Project (CIP) PE-13011.” 
4. 
Approval of Contract Number C21181431 With Palo Alto Housing 
Corporation (PAHC) Housing Services, LLC for a Not-to-Exceed Amount 
of $316,236 to Provide Administration and Consulting Services for the 
City’s Below Market Rate Housing Program for a Term of Two-years 
Through June 2023; and Approve a Fiscal Year 2022 Budget 
Amendment in the Residential Housing Fund. 
5. 
Approval of: 1) Contract Amendment Number Four to Contract Number 
C12142825 With NV5, Inc in an Amount Not-to-Exceed $527,146 to 
Incorporate the Approved California Department of Transportation 
(Caltrans) Additional Budget Request for the Newell Road/San 
Francisquito Creek Bridge Replacement Project, Capital Improvement 
Program (CIP) Project PE-12011, and to Extend the Contract Through 
December 31, 2024; 2) a Cooperation Agreement With the City of East 
Palo Alto; and 3) a Budget Amendment in the Capital Improvement 
Fund 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEMS 2 AND 5:  6-1 Tanaka no  
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM 1, 3, 4:  7-0 
Council 
Member 
Tanaka 
questioned 
whether 
the 
additional 
space 
contemplated in Agenda Item Number 2 was needed or wanted and opposed 
a lease agreement because it meant a rate increase.  The San Francisquito 
Creek Bridge needed to have protected bike lanes. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Action Items 
6. 
Consideration of Rescinding the City’s Local Emergency Proclamation; 
Adopt Emergency Ordinance 5527 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council 
of the City of Palo Alto to Continue the Uplift Local Encroachment 
Permit Program, Including Temporary Parklets;” and Discuss and 
Provide Direction on Street Closures Under the Uplift Local Streets 
Program. 
Kiely Nose, Interim Assistant City Manager, reported the Council approved 
the Emergency Ordinance in March 2020 at the onset of the pandemic.  The 
City implemented certain programs and policies to ease the City's work 
during the pandemic.   
Steve Guagliardo, Principal Management Analyst, advised that states of 
emergency continued at all levels of government but were subject to 
change.  California officially reopened on June 15, 2021 with the ending of 
the color-coded tier system.  Generally, businesses resumed indoor 
operations and activities without capacity restrictions but subject to State 
guidance and protocols.  In Santa Clara County, 71.2 percent of residents 
were fully vaccinated and 80 percent were partially vaccinated.  The State's 
anti-eviction law preempted local and county Ordinances.  While State 
eviction protections were scheduled to end on June 30, 2021, the Legislature 
and Governor reached a tentative agreement to extend protections to 
September 30, 2021.  The Council did not need to provide eviction 
protections.  Rescinding the local emergency triggered the 180-day 
extension period for permits and encroachments and the expiration of the 
Ordinance that authorized temporary encroachment permits.  Staff proposed 
an Emergency Ordinance to allow temporary encroachment permits to 
continue uninterrupted until a replacement Ordinance became effective on 
July 22, 2021 and expired on December 31, 2021.  Rescinding the local 
emergency did not automatically end street closures, and Staff requested 
Council direction regarding continuing or ending street closures in Downtown 
and on California Avenue.   
Rachael Tanner, Planning and Development Assistant Director, indicated in 
April 2021 the Council extended the City Manager's authority to close certain 
streets until October 31, 2021.  Options for the Council were to continue 
street closures until October 31, 2021, reopen Downtown on July 6, 2021 
and California Avenue on September 7, 2021 as Staff proposed after 
obtaining community feedback, and reopen one street but not the other.  
Staff considered weekend-only street closures, restriping University Avenue, 
reopening one lane of traffic on University, and encouraging pedestrians to 
utilize sidewalks and concluded these options were not viable.  Patron counts 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
for University and California Avenue were higher on weekends than 
weekdays.  Average Daily Trips (ADT) in April 2021 exceeded or were similar 
to ADT in 2016.   
Mr. Guagliardo related that an analysis of Sales Tax revenue did not 
ascertain the impacts of street closures.  From 2019 to 2020, Sales Tax 
revenues generated by food services in the California Avenue District 
declined by 47 percent, the University Avenue District by 55 percent, and 
the remainder of the City by 49 percent.  Similarly, Sales Tax revenues 
generated by retail in the California Avenue District declined by 21 percent, 
University Avenue District by 44 percent, and the remainder of the City by 
25.5 percent from 2019 to 2020.   
Ms. Tanner noted that the Council approved funding to pursue opportunities 
for more flexibility in street closures.  To facilitate the closure of public 
streets, the City needed to comply with established processes, craft a 
funding plan for capital and operating costs, and engage stakeholders in an 
urban design process. 
Lucia Miracchi, Massage Therapy Center, advised that clients with 
ambulatory issues walked an additional 150 feet to access her business due 
to the closure of California Avenue to vehicular traffic.   
Goolrukh A. Vakil felt closing University Avenue to vehicular traffic benefited 
some businesses and not others.  She preferred a closure of University 
Avenue.   
Hamilton Hitchings supported extending temporary encroachment permits to 
December 31, 2021 and keeping streets closed to vehicular traffic.  There 
was no reason to end the local emergency prior to the Governor ending the 
State emergency. 
Angie Evans, Palo Alto Forward, supported continued closure of University 
and California Avenues to vehicular traffic and urged the Council to extend 
eviction protections.   
Kevin Ma supported the closure of University and California Avenues to 
vehicular traffic and requested the Council extend eviction protections.   
Megan Kawkab believed closure of University Avenue and Ramona Street 
created major hardships for restaurants and businesses located on side 
streets and retail businesses located on University Avenue and Ramona 
Street.  She urged the Council to reopen Downtown streets only to vehicular 
traffic.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Neil Park-McClintick shared his enjoyment of Downtown with streets closed 
to vehicular traffic.  He questioned whether the pandemic or street closures 
affected businesses more.   
Guillaumebienaime remarked that closing University Avenue benefited only 
restaurants located on University Avenue.   
Charlie Weidanz commented that businesses needed years to recover from 
the economic impacts of the pandemic.  Retailers preferred open streets and 
enhanced sidewalks and parklets.   
Chris Tucher supported a permanent closure of California Avenue to 
vehicular traffic.   
Kelsey Banes supported the closure of City streets to vehicular traffic and 
the suggestion for a bike lane in the center of closed streets and encouraged 
the Council to extend the eviction moratorium. 
Jamie O’Connell supported the closure of California Avenue to vehicular 
traffic.  The path to rebuilding economic activity included closure of 
California Avenue.  The needs of University Avenue may be different from 
those of California Avenue.   
Cherry LeBrun, De Novo Fine Contemporary Jewelry, indicated two of four 
streets leading to her business were closed, and her customers were 
frustrated by the difficulty of reaching her store.  She supported parklets and 
reopening streets to vehicular traffic.   
Vikram Bhambri related that many people were not comfortable with indoor 
activities despite the high vaccination rate and encouraged the Council to 
continue street closures to vehicular traffic.   
Roxy Rapp supported parklets and reopening University Avenue to vehicular 
traffic on July 7, 2021. 
Nancy Coupal, Coupa Café, indicated her café on Lytton Avenue, which was 
open to traffic, suffered a greater decline in business than her café on 
Ramona Street, which was closed to traffic.  Keeping streets closed to traffic 
was a way to keep businesses operating.  The City needed to evolve. 
Rob Fischer, Palo Alto Creamery and Reposado, related that both businesses 
were severely impacted by the closure of University Avenue and Ramona 
Street.  He preferred an expansion of sidewalks, retention of parklets, and 
reopening streets to two-way traffic.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Council Member Kou requested clarification of the timelines for the 
Emergency and replacement Ordinances.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that the Council approved a second 
reading of the regular Ordinance.  The regular Ordinance was not going to 
be in effect if the Council immediately rescinded the local emergency.  The 
Emergency Ordinance was intended to fill the gap between the two. 
Mr. Guagliardo indicated the replacement Ordinance became effective on 
July 22, 2021 and expired on December 31, 2021.  The Emergency 
Ordinance became effective when the local emergency was rescinded and 
expired on July 22, 2021.   
Council Member Kou requested Staff's confidence in the Governor and 
Legislature continuing eviction protections to September 30, 2021. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, understood a bill regarding eviction protections 
was proposed as part of the State Budget.  If approved, the bill became 
effective by July 30, 2021.   
Council Member Kou asked if the Sales Tax analysis included Stanford 
Shopping Center. 
Mr. Guagliardo clarified that Stanford Shopping Center was included in the 
remainder of the City category for retail and food services. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether emails supporting closure of streets to 
vehicular traffic were sent by Palo Alto residents. 
Ms. Tanner did not know the residency of people sending the emails. 
Council Member Kou requested the number of parking spaces lost to street 
closures.   
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, responded approximately 79 
parking spaces on University Avenue.   
Council Member Cormack requested the disadvantages of rescinding the 
local emergency. 
Mr. Shikada reported Staff was prepared for rescission of the local 
emergency. 
Council Member Cormack clarified that Sales Tax revenues from retail and 
food services declined across the City from 2019 to 2020. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Mr. Guagliardo concurred. 
Council Member Cormack remarked that the Sales Tax analysis indicated 
sales in brick-and-mortar businesses were declining prior to the pandemic.  
People were really enjoying the street closures.  She inquired regarding 
street closures in other jurisdictions. 
Ms. Tanner indicated many cities were deciding whether to continue street 
closures.   
Council Member Filseth noted anecdotal evidence of the impacts of street 
closures on retail businesses and asked if cities compared notes on the 
impacts of street closures. 
Mr. Guagliardo answered no.  Streets were not yet open; consequently, 
there was no data for open streets to compare with closed streets.   
Council Member Filseth requested Staff monitor the situation and attempt to 
provide some data.   
Council 
Member 
Stone 
noted 
an 
overwhelming 
number 
of 
public 
communications supporting street closures.  Isolating the causes of 
decreased sales was difficult.  Many retailers reported their reliance on foot 
traffic for sales.  A potential compromise for University Avenue was allowing 
bicycle use of the street and pedestrian use of sidewalks.   
Ms. Tanner discussed the difficulties of preventing pedestrians from using 
the street.   
Council Member Stone suggested an Ordinance and signage prohibiting 
pedestrian use of specific streets may be beneficial.   
Vice Mayor Burt did not understand the difficulty.  Caution tape was one 
method to prevent pedestrians from walking in the street.  He inquired 
whether extending the local emergency allowed the Council to continue 
eviction protections.   
Ms. Stump replied yes.   
Vice Mayor Burt asked if approval of the replacement Ordinance was the only 
way to extend encroachment permits absent an extension of the Emergency 
Ordinance. 
Ms. Stump reiterated that the Council previously adopted the replacement 
Ordinance.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt commented that six of seven Council Members were 
required to approve an Emergency Ordinance.  He suggested the first 
consideration for the Council was implementation of the Emergency 
Ordinance because the decision was possibly going to influence the Council's 
decision regarding the local emergency. 
Ms. Stump concurred. 
Council Member Tanaka believed the goal was to maximize business activity 
for restaurant and retail businesses along University and California Avenues.  
The Council needed sales data to inform its decision.  He inquired about data 
that Staff collected. 
Kara Apple, Police Lieutenant, reported data was anecdotal because 
businesses were not willing to share their data.  Sales were dependent on 
many factors. 
Mr. Shikada recalled confidentiality restrictions on information for individual 
businesses.   
Ms. Apple added that businesses were willing to share data comparing sales 
for their locations in Palo Alto and other cities. 
Council Member Tanaka shared data regarding average percentage of 
growth in sales from traffic for 12 businesses located along closed and open 
portions of University Avenue in Downtown.   
Mayor DuBois stated the emergency was over.  The Emergency Ordinance 
needed to be discussed separately from street closures.  He inquired 
whether Council Members were interested in scheduling a Special Meeting to 
discuss eviction protections.  The Council needed to ensure sidewalks were 
open for pedestrian access and determine an appropriate rent for public 
space.  He expressed concern regarding the impacts on residential streets 
and the Council's inability to find that University Avenue was not needed for 
vehicles.  He requested clarification of Vice Mayor Burt's suggestion. 
Ms. Stump advised that Vice Mayor Burt suggested the Council consider an 
extension of encroachment permits first because it may influence the 
Council's decision regarding a date to end the local emergency. 
Council Member Filseth agreed that the local emergency did not need to be 
tied with the other topics.  The question for the Council was when to reopen 
University Avenue to vehicular traffic.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt noted that vehicular traffic in Downtown was back to pre-
pandemic levels.  Assisting all businesses equally was going to be difficult.  
The closure of a portion of Ramona did not appear to disadvantage 
businesses as much as other street closures because of the nature of those 
businesses.  Initiatives were needed to assist retailers located along 
California Avenue.  Music venues improved business for adjacent California 
Avenue restaurants, and the Council needed to consider music venues in 
Downtown. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified that traffic counts for 2016 were not really useful as pre-
pandemic data.  Between 2013 and 2016, ADT increased approximately 22 
percent on University Avenue.   
Mayor DuBois felt businesses needed certainty in order to plan for the 
future.  Perhaps the City needed to charge for the use of closed streets.  
Restaurants wanted additional space, and people enjoyed dining outside.  
However, allowing only restaurants to use the sidewalk and street was not 
fair to the entire business community.  He supported reopening University 
Avenue to vehicular traffic on July 6, 2021 and California Avenue on 
September 7, 2021. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to create metrics and measure impacts in 
order to make informed decisions.  More data was needed.  He shared maps 
of positive and negative effects and opinions regarding existing street 
closures in Downtown and California Avenue.  He preferred to gather data 
before taking action on street closures.   
Council Member Stone concurred with the Council's need for more data.  He 
inquired about the number of outdoor seats a restaurant was allowed. 
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director, explained that a restaurant's total 
number of indoor and outdoor seats was not allowed to exceed the indoor 
capacity of the restaurant.  Staff was not proactively enforcing the 
restriction. 
Council Member Stone asked if Staff was aware of any funding or concepts 
that were available to assist retailers, particularly those along University 
Avenue. 
Mr. Shikada reported Staff discussed the issue with the Palo Alto Chamber of 
Commerce (Chamber).  The Chamber was able to provide assistance with 
marketing, promotions, and consensus-building.  Funding of $50,000 to 
$100,000 was likely needed for marketing and promotions, and COVID-19 
recovery funds were a possible source of funding. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Council Member Stone preferred to maintain street closures on Ramona 
Street and California Avenue with bicycles allowed to utilize roadways and 
pedestrians directed to utilize sidewalks.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the Council needed to withdraw the City 
Manager's authority to open and close streets through October 31, 2021 or 
to direct the City Manager to open and close streets. 
Mr. Shikada indicated either method was within the Council's purview.  The 
Council provided that authority so that Staff was able to respond to dynamic 
situations, but situations were currently stable.   
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of the process and timeline 
for permanently closing streets.   
Mr. Shikada related that stakeholder engagement for closing streets in 
Downtown alone was likely to be fairly complex.  A California Environmental 
Quality Act (CEQA) analysis also required some time to conduct. 
Ms. Tanner advised that the process included outreach, design, CEQA 
analysis, and Council consideration of policy issues and environmental 
analysis. 
Mr. Eggleston suggested a traffic analysis probably would not require as 
much time as hiring a consultant, design work, stakeholder engagement, 
and developing costs and plans. 
Council Member Cormack requested the status of work in Downtown. 
Mr. Eggleston reported Staff was preparing a scope of work for a consultant 
and anticipated issuing a Request for Proposals (RFP) in July 2021 and 
bringing a contract to Council in September or October 2021. 
Council Member Cormack remarked that controlling the various factors that 
potentially contributed to a decline in business on California Avenue was not 
possible.  Ramona Street activated City Hall Plaza.  University Avenue was 
not a pedestrian-only mall.  This was an opportunity to make changes. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member XX to: 
A. 
End the City’s Local Emergency on July 1, 2021;  
B. 
Pass the Emergency Ordinance to continue the Permit Encroachment 
Program;  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
C. 
Support the City Manager’s suggestion to open the downtown area on 
July 6, 2021, and California Avenue on September 7, 2021; and  
D. 
Allocate $50,000 to Chamber of Commerce to engage with all 
businesses for cross-promotional activities and small events from 
current year COVID funds.  
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND  
Council Member Kou proposed amending Part C to reopen streets in 
Downtown and California Avenue on September 30, 2021 and limit closure of 
Ramona Street to half of the roadway.   
Council Member Tanaka suggested another amendment to require collection 
of sales data to inform the Council's decision.   
Mayor DuBois inquired if half a block of Ramona or one travel lane was going 
to be open to vehicular traffic. 
Council Member Kou answered one travel lane. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the intention was to open one travel lane in 
the block of Ramona that was currently closed.   
Council Member Kou replied yes. 
Council Member Filseth noted few retail businesses were located in that 
block of Ramona. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka to: 
A. 
End the City’s Local Emergency on July 1, 2021; 
B. 
Pass the Emergency Ordinance to continue the Permit Encroachment 
Program; 
C. 
Support the City Manager’s suggestion to maintain the closure of the 
downtown area and California Avenue until September 30, 2021, and 
to open Ramona Street for one-way traffic while keeping the 
encroachments of the cafes; 
D. 
Allocate $50,000 to Chamber of Commerce to engage with all 
businesses for cross-promotional activities and small events from 
current year COVID funds; and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
E. 
Direct Staff to collect sales data of willing businesses. 
Council Member Kou commented that closing University Avenue was difficult 
when the Council did not know what the traffic situation was going to be 
when businesses and schools fully reopened.  This was an opportunity to 
collect traffic and sales data.   
Council Member Tanaka hoped more businesses responded to the City's 
request for data than responded to his request.   
Ms. Apple reported opening one lane of travel on Ramona was going to 
provide the same space as a parklet. 
Vice Mayor Burt indicated no one addressed him with a request to reopen 
one lane of traffic in the closed block of Ramona.  He supported maintaining 
the existing closure of Ramona. 
Council Member Kou expressed concern that two retailers in that block 
invested a lot in their businesses, and there could be issues for them if the 
block remained closed.   
AMENDMENT:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka to continue with the current closure for Ramona Street as a half-
closed configuration.  
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER: to remove the beginning of the Motion Part C, 
“Support the City Manager’s suggestion to maintain … .” 
Vice Mayor Burt asked about the status of street closures come 
September 30, 2021. 
Council Member Kou wanted the Council to revisit the issue and review data 
after the summer recess.  This period was intended to notify businesses of 
the possibility of reopening streets on September 30, 2021. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER: to add onto the Motion Part C, “... and review 
the next actions of the closures of California Avenue and University Avenue 
after Council Summer break.” 
Council Member Cormack supported the Amendment. 
AMENDMENT PASSED:  5-2 DuBois, Kou no 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt reiterated his concern regarding aligning the termination 
date of the state of emergency with an extension of an eviction moratorium.  
He requested an update regarding legislative action on an eviction 
moratorium. 
Niccolo De Luca, Townsend expressed confidence that the Legislature 
intended to vote early the following week to extend the eviction moratorium.  
Potential terms of the moratorium included extending protections through 
September 30, 2021; making landlords eligible for 100 percent rent debt 
from April 1, 2020; allowing landlords who received assistance at 80 percent 
to apply for the remaining 20 percent; making landlords eligible for 100 
percent even if tenants vacated the premises; and providing eligible tenants 
with some type of relief after September 30, 2021.  The Legislature also 
discussed additional funding for regions of the state with higher needs.  
Because it was part of the State Budget, the bill needed approval by a two-
thirds vote.  His impression was that the bill was going to be applied 
statewide and to preempt local Ordinances.   
Vice Mayor Burt suggested the Council consider scheduling a Special Meeting 
during the summer break if the bill did not pass.  He inquired whether an 
Ordinance to extend the eviction moratorium required a second reading if 
the local emergency remained in effect. 
Ms. Stump advised that the Council had the discretion to adopt a regular 
Ordinance, which required a second reading and 30 days to become 
effective, or an Urgency Ordinance, which became effective upon the first 
reading.  An Urgency Ordinance required approval by a super majority of the 
Council.  A super majority of Council Members present was necessary to 
approve an Urgency Ordinance in a Special Meeting. 
Vice Mayor Burt suggested revising the July 1, 2021 date in Part A of the 
Motion to July 15, 2021 so that the Council had ample time to approve an 
Ordinance. 
Mayor DuBois requested clarification of the logic for a July 15, 2021 date. 
Ms. Stump indicated that an Ordinance required a first reading and after 11 
days a second reading, and 30 days after the second reading, the Ordinance 
became effective. 
Mayor DuBois noted that if the State took no action, tenants were potentially 
going to be evicted for 45 days or so. 
Vice Mayor Burt requested the date that the State order expired. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Ms. Stump answered June 30, 2021. 
Vice Mayor Burt stated this was the best course of action if the Council 
wanted to consider an Ordinance. 
Mayor DuBois asked if the Council was able to do that without a local 
emergency. 
Ms. Stump responded yes.  The local emergency and an Urgency Ordinance 
were not related.  An Urgency Ordinance required the Council to conclude 
that the action was a matter of public health and safety.  If the Council felt 
there was a need to prevent significant residential evictions, the topic 
qualified for an Urgency Ordinance.   
Vice Mayor Burt related that he previously contacted the Santa Clara Valley 
Chapter of the American Institute of Architects (AIA), and they were 
receptive to participating in a design charette at no charge.  Community 
members had expertise in urban design.  A consultant was not needed when 
better outcomes were achieved through engaging with community partners.  
He proposed amending Part D of the Motion to include "pursue streetscape 
design expertise from the local AIA chapter or others and evaluate potential 
sites for permanent performance stages in both downtowns." 
Council Member Kou did not accept the proposed Amendment. 
Ms. Stump noted that competitive solicitation processes had to be followed 
unless the Council enacted an Ordinance providing an exception. 
Ms. Nose added that compensating any of the proposed organizations also 
required a competitive solicitation process. 
Council Member Cormack requested the streets proposed for redesign. 
Vice Mayor Burt replied University, California Avenue, and Ramona.  The 
priority was California Avenue.  His intent was to establish a direction for 
utilizing those resources. 
Council Member Cormack inquired regarding Staff's interpretation of the 
proposed Amendment in relation to the work underway. 
Vice Mayor Burt wanted to provide general direction so that Staff returned 
with recommendations to integrate the two. 
AMENDMENT:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to add onto the Motion as a proposed Part F:  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
F. 
Direct Staff to include in its workplan for streetscape design to pursue 
design expertise from the local AIA chapter or others, and to include 
an evaluation of potential sites for permanent performance stages in 
downtown. 
Council Member Cormack felt the Amendment moved the Council 
incrementally forward and utilized available experience.   
Mr. Eggleston believed the proposed process could provide some interesting 
design ideas, but the process on its own was not likely to provide technical 
information necessary to development of cost estimates.   
Vice Mayor Burt clarified that the AIA and other resources were intended to 
provide potential designs, and Staff or consultants were intended to prepare 
the technical information for designs. 
Mr. Shikada reported the two processes may require duplicative efforts.  Pro 
bono design work was likely to be more creative and needed to precede the 
engagement of design professionals who were liable for errors and 
omissions.  The proposal would likely extend the timeline for this type of 
work.   
Vice Mayor Burt concurred with sequencing the work.  However, the process 
was likely to require less time and achieve more buy-in.  Consultants were 
not the most effective method to attain creativity or community buy-in.   
Council Member Cormack proposed limiting the Amendment to California 
Avenue.   
Vice Mayor Burt indicated work could begin with California Avenue with a 
future decision to apply the process to other streets.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE AMENDMENT WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER: to add to the end the Amendment, “… 
performance stages on California Avenue and other potential areas such as 
downtown ... .” 
Mr. Eggleston advised that the AIA was responsible for the competitive 
process to design the Highway 101 Bike Bridge.  Complications previously 
arose when utilizing these types of methods.   
Mayor DuBois suggested the Council pause its consideration of this Agenda 
Item, continue to the next two Agenda Items, and return to this Agenda 
Item in the interest of time and public speakers.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt suggested the Council vote on Parts A through E if they 
were not contentious. 
Council Member Cormack noted that not all Council Members addressed the 
Motion. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Burt to continue 
this item to the end of the meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  4-3 Cormack, Filseth, Tanaka no 
CONTINUED HERE AT THE END OF THE MEETING - 11:50 P.M. 
Council Member Filseth believed the demand for outdoor dining was 
sufficient for the Council to develop a strategy for it.  The Council needed to 
make multiple strategic decisions before designing new streetscapes.  Staff 
needed to recommend a long-term strategy for outdoor dining.   
Council Member Cormack suggested creative streetscape ideas were likely to 
help the Council envision options. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE AMENDMENT WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER: to change the Amendment to read, “… for 
streetscape design on California Avenue to pursue design expertise ... .” 
Council Member Kou stated a carefully considered process was needed to 
design new streetscapes and to engage the business and residential 
communities.   
Vice Mayor Burt clarified that a design charette was not intended to exclude 
the business community.  The design process needed to include the business 
community and the community at large and to be led by creative architects.   
AMENDMENT AS AMENDED:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council 
Member Cormack to add onto the Motion as a proposed Part F:  
F. 
Direct Staff to include in its workplan for streetscape design on 
California Avenue to pursue design expertise from the local AIA 
chapter or others, and to include an evaluation of potential sites for 
permanent performance stages in other potential areas such as 
downtown.  
AMENDMENT AS AMENDED PASSED:  4-2 DuBois absent, Filseth, Kou no 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER: to add to the Motion Part C, “… direct Staff to 
reroute pedestrians onto the sidewalk of University Avenue … .” 
Council Member Tanaka shared his street closure analysis and hoped Staff's 
data collection and analysis reflected improved numbers.  If the trend 
continued, closing California Avenue and opening University Avenue were 
logical choices. 
Ms. Apple requested additional details of the Council's direction to collect 
sales data. 
Vice Mayor Burt understood that the direction was for Staff to request retail 
businesses provide the percentage change in their gross revenue.   
Council Member Tanaka added that the data included year-over-year figures. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the primary question was whether street 
closure significantly impacted the recovery of retail and restaurant 
businesses.   
Council Member Tanaka responded yes. 
Council Member Cormack was unsure whether that data was going to be 
helpful.  It needed to be reviewed by the industry.   
Mr. Shikada reported business information provided to the City was public 
record and would be provided to any member of the public who sought it.  
Disclosure of this fact caused businesses not to provide sales data.  He 
proposed Staff return to the Council with recommendations for structuring 
the streetscape design process.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER:  to add into the Motion Part F, “… have Staff 
return with a process recommendation to pursue a pro-bono design 
expertise such as AIA, ARB or others … .” 
Ms. Nose recalled that Staff provided Sales Tax data, which was gross 
revenues subject to Sales and Use Taxes.   
Vice Mayor Burt commented that the difference was possibly location.  A 
simplified way to provide the information was to parse it geographically. 
Ms. Nose advised that Staff was legally prohibited from providing detailed 
data.  Staff probably was not able to aggregate or disaggregate opened 
versus closed street data further by retail versus restaurant.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER:  to restate the Motion Part E as, “Direct Staff to 
provide available data attempting to distinguish impacts on closed streets 
versus non-closed streets of willing businesses;” 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER: to add to the end of the Motion Part E, “… to the 
extent allowed legally; … .” 
Council Member Tanaka wanted Staff to provide data more current than tax 
data.  Most businesses were willing to share percentage data.   
Council Member Filseth suggested the Council direct Staff to estimate the 
impact of closed streets versus open streets on retail and restaurant 
businesses and allow Staff to determine the method for calculating that 
data. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER:  to update the beginning of the Motion Part E as, 
“Direct Staff to provide an analysis—to the extent the available data allows—
… .” 
Council Member Tanaka proposed Staff return to Council with a plan for 
reopening University Avenue with parklets, wider sidewalks, and fewer travel 
lanes. 
Mr. Shikada reported Staff did not prepare a plan for reopening streets prior 
to the meeting.  Based on the Council's direction, Staff was able to craft a 
plan for an intermediate condition. 
Ms. Tanner related that parklets were going to continue based on Part B of 
the Motion. 
Mr. Shikada clarified that wider sidewalks and directing pedestrians to 
sidewalks were not possible in an interim plan, and Staff was going to 
consider how best to accomplish those topics.   
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council 
Member Tanaka to: 
A. 
End the City’s Local Emergency on July 1, 2021; 
B. 
Pass the Emergency Ordinance to continue the Permit Encroachment 
Program; 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
C. 
Continue with the closure of the downtown area and California Avenue 
until September 30, 2021, continue with the current closure for 
Ramona Street as a half-closed configuration, direct Staff to reroute 
pedestrians onto the sidewalk of University Avenue, and review the 
next actions of the closures of California Avenue and University 
Avenue after Council Summer break; 
D. 
Allocate $50,000 to Chamber of Commerce to engage with all 
businesses for cross-promotional activities and small events from 
current year COVID funds;  
E. 
Direct Staff to provide an analysis—to the extent the available data 
allows—in order to distinguish impacts on closed streets versus non-
closed streets of willing businesses to the extent allowed legally; and 
F. 
Direct Staff to include in its workplan for streetscape design on 
California Avenue, have Staff return with a process recommendation to 
pursue a pro-bono design expertise such as AIA, ARB or others, and to 
include an evaluation of potential sites for permanent performance 
stages in other potential areas such as downtown. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-0 DuBois absent 
7. 
Review of the Policy & Services Committee's Recommendation on 
State Legislative Advocacy; Discussion and Direction on Potential 
Alterations to the City's State Legislative Advocacy Program and 
Related Actions. 
Chantal Cotton Gaines, Assistant City Manager, reported the Policy and 
Services Committee (P&S) considered options in May 2021 and provided 
recommendations and requested additional information.   
Niccolo De Luca, Townsend, advised that Option 1 was to provide comment 
letters on many proposed bills regardless of author, likelihood of passage, 
and effect on the City.  Option 1 was time intensive, required a greater 
presence in Sacramento, and provided less impact.  Option 2 was to 
advocate for bills that advanced the City's major goals.  Option 3 was to rely 
on Legislative Guidelines and comment on bills of interest to the City and 
with a fair chance of moving forward.   
Ms. Cotton Gaines indicated that Lafayette and Cupertino utilized a standing 
legislative committee to review all proposed bills and select bills for further 
analysis.  Staff in Mountain View and other nearby cities reviewed legislation 
and proposed bills for comment letters.  In Southern California, cities 
analyzed bills with a high likelihood of passage and high impact on the 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
community.  In 2021, 2,800 bills were introduced.  After applying the 
Legislative Guidelines, approximately 179 bills of interest to the City were 
before the Appropriations Committee.  Action by the Appropriations 
Committee further reduced the number of bills of interest to the City to 
approximately 159.  Option 3 reduced the number of bills to about 25.  Staff 
planned to continue tracking bills related to Legislative Guidelines and 
working on other legislative priorities.  Staff recommended the Council take 
a position on Senate Bill (SB) 2 regarding decertification and qualified 
immunity for peace officers, SB 16 regarding release of records for use of 
force incidents, Assembly Bill (AB) 26 regarding use of force, and AB 718 
regarding investigations of misconduct by peace officers.   
Mr. De Luca stated he intended to meet with Legislative staff members the 
following day regarding the eviction moratorium and would provide any new 
information to Staff. 
Mayor DuBois inquired whether Staff was recommending the Council modify 
its advocacy process. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines indicated Staff was seeking clarification of the Council's 
preferences.   
Council Member Kou commented that the concern was the number of bills 
that impacted cities on many levels.  Some cities obtained in-depth 
legislative reports from their advocates.  Because more bills impacted the 
City, the Council needed deeper analyses and detailed recommendations.   
Mayor DuBois noted that Legislative Guidelines were updated annually.  The 
existing process was working well.  Perhaps, the Council needed to spend 
more time ensuring the Legislative Guidelines were appropriate.  He inquired 
whether the policy manual needed to be revised if the Council wished to 
alter the review process. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines related that Staff was able to update the manual and 
present it to P&S with the Legislative Guidelines in November or December 
2021. 
Mayor DuBois suggested the Council did not need to waste time reviewing 
legislation that did not affect the City or had no chance of passing.  He did 
not believe any changes were necessary at the current time. 
Council Member Cormack concurred with Mayor DuBois.  She preferred the 
Council spend more time advocating for legislation.  She inquired about a 
more active role for Council Members. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Mr. De Luca emphasized that face-to-face interaction among Council 
Members and Legislators was very helpful, especially during January 
advocacy days and April or May prior to adoption of the Budget. 
Vice Mayor Burt inquired whether Mayor DuBois believed the existing 
Legislative Guidelines allowed the Council to select one of the options or 
whether Mayor DuBois did not want to select one of the options. 
Mayor DuBois did not wish to delete other items in the Legislative 
Guidelines. 
Vice Mayor Burt supported retention of the current strategy manual as long 
as it aligned with Option 3 and enabled the Council to increase its 
engagement on legislation.  The Council needed to continue opposing 
legislation that potentially harmed the City. 
Mayor DuBois inquired whether Staff sought approval of recommendations 
for legislation regarding peace officers.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported Staff requested affirmation of the 
recommendations or alternative direction. 
Council Member Stone believed the Council should support the four police 
reform bills because they aligned with the Council's and City's policy 
priorities.  He inquired whether Mr. De Luca found "papering the Capital" to 
be an effective advocacy technique.   
Mr. De Luca advised that it was a method to make the City known to 
Legislators, but he did not believe it was effective advocacy.  A thoughtful 
and thorough position was most effective.   
Council Member Stone remarked that the City probably did not need to make 
itself known.  Option 3 seemed to be a good balance of the other two 
options.  Council Members visiting the Capital was an interesting idea.  He 
inquired about the potential cost of forming a standing committee for 
legislation. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines advised that Staff did not prepare a cost estimate.  Staff 
time to notice meetings, analyze bills, prepare for meetings, and work with 
state advocates was going to be significant.   
Mr. Shikada acknowledged the burden for the City Clerk's Office to prepare 
for additional meetings.   
Council Member Stone asked about the potential for a significant increase in 
the City's contract with Townsend for attending at committee meetings. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Mr. De Luca did not anticipate an increase.  Townsend would be happy to 
prepare more thorough memoranda and attend additional meetings if the 
Council wished.   
Council Member Stone commented that the detailed memorandum regarding 
pending legislation was likely to be helpful.   
Ms. Cotton Gaines added that Staff was able to work with Townsend to 
narrow the list of bills to include in a detailed memorandum. 
MOTION:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Stone to: 
A. 
Continue with Strategy Option #3 (Strategic Weighing in on Issues of 
Interest to the City);  
B. 
Support the 4 police bills (SB 2, SB 16, AB 26, AB 718) as 
recommended by Staff; and  
C. 
Ask Staff to evaluate whether we should support Energy Innovation 
and Carbon Dividend Act under existing legislative guidelines and if so 
prepare a letter of support.  
Council Member Cormack requested any recommended amendments for SB 
2. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that SB 2 would change one of the key 
legal doctrines that governed courts' evaluation of allegations of police 
misconduct.  Staff believed that was going to have significant impacts on 
cities that employed police officers.  SB 2 required more thought and careful 
evaluation that was not performed at the State level. 
Mr. De Luca added that additional amendments were going to be proposed 
for SB 2.  The City needed to review the amendments before taking a 
position. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the City was going to recommend 
amendments. 
Mr. De Luca indicated the City was able to propose amendments. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines related that supporting SB 2 with amendments provided 
more opportunities for Staff to discuss concerns about qualified immunity 
with the bill's sponsor. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether SB 2 applied to sheriff's deputies 
as well as police officers. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Ms. Stump understood SB 2 applied to law enforcement generally. 
Council Member Cormack requested future updates on SB 2.  The ad hoc 
committee needed to review and recommend legislation. 
Council Member Kou wanted to understand the process for Staff or Mr. De 
Luca to bring legislation to the Council's attention. 
Mr. De Luca explained that he flagged bills for watching or discussion and 
paid close attention to bills about which the Council expressed concerns.  He 
and his colleagues discussed legislation with Ms. Gaines biweekly.   
Ms. Cotton Gaines indicated P&S meetings were opportunities for discussion 
of bills not on the list for discussion and for P&S to direct Staff to monitor 
additional bills. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER:  to add onto the Motion as Part D: 
D. 
Direct Staff and Lobbyist to provide a forensic memorandum of a 
limited number (less than 25) of bills as legislative updates with the 
consultation of different City departments. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about bills crafted to impact rising crime 
rates. 
Mr. De Luca suggested cities, counties, District Attorneys, and Sheriffs' 
Offices in the region collaborate on bills for public safety and diversion.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether SB 2, SB 16, AB 26, or AB 718 
was intended to reduce public safety. 
Mr. De Luca answered no. 
Council Member Tanaka felt the Council and the community supported 
virtual meetings and hoped they continued. 
Mr. De Luca reported he and his colleagues previously contacted the 
Governor's Office to encourage a continuation of virtual meetings.   
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council 
Member Stone to: 
A. 
Continue with Strategy Option #3 (Strategic Weighing in on Issues of 
Interest to the City);  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
B. 
Support the 4 police bills (SB 2, SB 16, AB 26, AB 718) as 
recommended by Staff;  
C. 
Ask Staff to evaluate whether we should support Energy Innovation 
and Carbon Dividend Act under existing legislative guidelines and if so 
prepare a letter of support; and  
D. 
Direct Staff and Lobbyist to provide a forensic memorandum of a 
limited number (less than 25) of bills as legislative updates with the 
consultation of different City departments. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
8. 
PUBLIC HEARING / QUASI-JUDICIAL. 250 Hamilton Avenue [20PLN-
00118]: 
Appeal 
of 
Director's 
Approval 
of 
Three 
Wireless 
Communication Facilities (Verizon Cluster 4) by Verizon to be Placed 
Adjacent to 853 and 1221 Middlefield Road and 850 Webster Street. 
Environmental Assessment: Exempt From the Provisions of California 
Environmental 
Quality 
Act 
(CEQA) 
per 
Section 
15303 
(New 
Construction and Conversion of Small Structures) and 15311 
(Accessory Structures). 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, reported the 
Federal Communication Commission's (FCC) Small Cell Order established the 
regulatory 
framework 
for 
processing 
applications 
for 
Wireless 
Communication Facilities (WCF) and was intended to remove barriers at the 
local and state levels to processing 5G technology and expanding wireless 
networks.  Circuit court decisions reversed the FCC's ruling requiring 
objective aesthetic standards and allowed reasonable aesthetic criteria.  
Staff was preparing amendments to the local Ordinance to reintroduce 
subjective criteria.  Objective criteria in place when applications were filed 
were applied to applications.  Aesthetic criteria were not allowed to prohibit 
or have the effect of prohibiting WCF.  Three WCF nodes with two or three 
antennas on each were before the Council due to Staff's concerns that the 
nodes did not comply with objective or exception criteria.  Node 205 was 
located within a 600-foot radius of Addison Elementary School.  Node 061, 
located on Middlefield Road, required exceptions to be located in a 
residential district, for antennas to face private property, and for the 
proposed poles.  Staff reviewed three alternative locations for Node 061 and 
concluded that the alternative locations required additional exceptions.  
Node 204, located on Webster near Channing House, required exceptions to 
be located in a residential district, on a collector street, and within 600 feet 
of another WCF.  After reviewing six alternative locations, Staff determined 
the proposed location was preferable to the alternative locations.  Node 205, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
located on Middlefield Road, required an exception because underground 
infrastructure prevented the planting of vegetative screening within 35 feet 
of the node.  Five alternative locations were deemed unacceptable due to 
technical requirements.  The proposed location of Node 205 was preferred 
because of its proximity to an adjacent commercial use.  The City's 
consultant peer reviewed radio frequency (RF) emissions and found that the 
emissions were consistent with FCC standards.  The Appellant alleged that 
the Applicant failed to properly notice residents and property owners located 
within 600 feet of each node.  Staff reviewed the Applicant's mailing labels 
and found that a number of addresses were omitted from the labels.  As to 
noticing for Node 204, Staff experienced challenges with noticing residents 
of Channing House because the County of Santa Clara (County) did not 
register the property as having more than 200 units.  The Appellant's 
allegations referred to screening, concealment of antennas, and size of 
antennas.  If the Council chose to continue the hearing, an extension of the 
shot clock was needed.   
Public Hearing opened at 9:13 P.M. 
Jeanne Fleming, Appellant, referred to 19 reasons for the Council to uphold 
the appeal and reverse the Director's Determination.  Verizon failed to notice 
all residents and property owners located within 600 feet of project sites, 
specifically all residents of Channing Housing.  Staff justified the omission by 
stating that the omission was unlikely to result in any substantive change to 
the project.  Verizon's proposed WCF did not comply with design standards 
requiring a single, integrated shroud.  Verizon did not prove that denial of 
the application deprived it of rights guaranteed by federal law.  Verizon 
misrepresented its rights, and Staff did not question Verizon's assertions.   
Jeremy Stroup, Applicant, reviewed the timeline of actions taken regarding 
the application, proposed locations for nodes, City Staff who reviewed the 
application, and photo simulations of Nodes 061, 204, and 205.   
Paul Albritton, Applicant legal counsel, indicated that the proposed nodes 
complied with design standards.  The application deserved the Council's 
affirmation of the Director's Determination.  None of the Appellant's 
allegations rose to the level of substantial evidence that was required to 
deny a WCF application.  The mailing vendor failed to notify Channing House 
residents of the community meeting, but the failure was not prejudicial.  
However, Verizon was willing to agree to an additional Condition of Approval 
requiring Verizon to hold an additional community meeting, notify Channing 
House residents of the meeting, and report results of the meeting to the 
Director.  A provision of the WCF Guidelines allowed unshrouded antennas in 
the ultrawide band frequency range.  The Small Cell Order stated that 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
wireless communications providers were not required to comply with the 
Ninth Circuit's significant gap, least intrusive means standard.  Wireless 
communications providers needed to show that not permitting WCF would 
materially inhibit the ability to densify networks, enhance services, or 
provide a new service.   
Chris Robell supported the appeal.  Residents of Channing House were not 
given an opportunity to provide input.  Residents were concerned about RF 
emissions from the existing two cell towers and the proposed third tower. 
Anne Husty supported the appeal due to the Applicant not following 
procedural regulations.   
Kip Husty supported the appeal and hoped the Council supported the 
community rather than big business. 
Ardan Michael Blum commended Ms. Fleming for standing up to corporate 
America. 
Karen Saxena reiterated the Applicant's failure to notify all residents and the 
proposed designs not complying with guidelines.  The Council needed to 
uphold the appeal.   
Ms. Fleming commented that the application failed to adhere to so many 
components of the Ordinance that it should not have been submitted or 
approved.  She requested the Council overturn the Director's Determination. 
Mr. Albritton noted that the City's guidelines were some of the most 
stringent in the state.  The Applicant reduced the number of exceptions from 
hundreds to a handful.  If the application was denied based on exceptions, 
no facility could be approved.  Denial of the application was likely to violate 
the requirements of federal law. 
Public Hearing closed at 9:53 P.M. 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether the shroud design complied with 
guidelines. 
Mr. Lait reported the Council-approved Resolution contained requirements 
for a WCF antenna and shroud, street poles, and wood utility poles and an 
adjustment for equipment that could not propagate an adequate signal 
within shrouding required by the design standard.  Staff measured each 
panel and its associated equipment and determined that they complied with 
the adjustment.  The proposed technology did not avail itself of single-
shroud technology, which triggered the adjustment.  Staff considered each 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
antenna and its shroud individually, and the Appellant believed one shroud 
was needed for all antennas on a pole.   
Council Member Filseth inquired whether one shroud met the volume 
requirement. 
Mr. Lait replied no.  The Applicant's information indicated that one shroud 
prevented the signal from propagating.  The Appellant also asserted that the 
mast arm and bracket attaching the antenna to the mast arm needed to be 
included in the volumetric calculation.  To add the mast arm and bracket to 
the antenna and shroud calculation was not feasible based on today's 
technology. 
Council Member Tanaka disclosed a conversation with the Appellant and 
indicated the Appellant disclosed no new information.  He asked the 
Appellant to clarify her comment that Verizon's notice to residents was 
misleading.   
Ms. Fleming read Verizon's statement.  "Small wireless facility" was a legal 
term of art, and no one could describe the wireless facility as small.  The 
notice did not include the node addresses or the fact that the nodes were 
located within 600 feet of recipients. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether the Applicant indemnified the City 
against lawsuits claiming damages for illness from RF emissions. 
Mr. Albritton answered yes, if it was associated with the granting of a 
permit. 
Council Member Stone asked if the Applicant provided supporting evidence 
that the equipment was not able to propagate an adequate signal within the 
shrouding requirement. 
Garrett Sauls, Associate Planner, reported the Applicant provided a number 
of studies that addressed signal attenuation.  The City's consultant also 
provided evidence that confirmed signal attenuation. 
Council Member Stone requested the reasons for three separate shrouds not 
impeding the signal, but one shroud impeding the signal. 
Mr. Sauls explained that individual shrouds contained holes for signals to 
propagate while a single shroud did not.   
Council Member Stone inquired whether the Applicant tested a single 
shroud's ability to propagate a signal. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 28 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Mr. Lait understood a single shroud did not allow the signal to propagate. 
Mr. Albritton advised that the 5G frequency did not penetrate traditional 
shrouding.  It did penetrate a very thin film, which covered the holes of 
individual shrouds.  The guideline did not require a shroud if the signal was 
not able to penetrate the shroud.  The Applicant proposed a small shroud to 
hide cabling on each antenna.   
Council Member Stone questioned whether it was possible to utilize the 
same type of hole and covering from an individual shroud for a single 
shroud.   
Mr. Albritton explained that the maximum allowed volume precluded the use 
of a single shroud.   
Council Member Stone reiterated that the burden of proof was on the 
Applicant to demonstrate that a single shroud did not allow the signal to 
propagate.   
Council Member Kou noted that the notice provided a contact person only 
and inquired whether that was a typical notice. 
Mr. Sauls indicated onsite notice boards were required to provide the project 
description and an elevation image of the project.  Unfortunately, the paper 
notice adhered to the boards seemed to have been removed or fallen off.   
Council Member Kou expressed concerns regarding no onsite notices and 
committees not vetting design changes.  She inquired whether the City's 
consultant's report indicated RF emissions were higher than FCC limits. 
Lee Afflerbach, City consultant, reported RF emissions were in full 
compliance with FCC requirements.  The proposed radios operated on a 
frequency that was ten times the maximum frequency of 4G units.  
Consequently, there was significantly more signal loss with any type of 
insulator material.  In his experience, 5G antennas with integrated radios 
were not shrouded.  He assumed a shroud was omitted to minimize signal 
loss.   
Council Member Kou requested Ms. Fleming clarify her comment about 
screening trees in relation to antennas.   
Ms. Fleming advised that the consultant's report clearly stated RF emissions 
exceeded FCC limits at 28 feet above ground.  The Ordinance required the 
Applicant to screen WCF.  The Applicant chose Chinese pistache trees to 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 29 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
screen WCF, but Chinese pistache trees were deciduous.  Deciduous trees 
did not screen WCF for several months of each year.   
Council Member Kou asked why 5G was not a personal wireless service.   
Ariel Strauss, Appellant legal counsel, provided the Telecommunications Act 
of 1996's definition of personal wireless service.  The statute and the 
Supreme Court indicated the preemptive authority of the FCC was limited to 
personal wireless service.  In 2018, the FCC redefined mobile broadband as 
a data service rather than a personal wireless service.   
Mr. Albritton advised that personal wireless service was not regulated by 
frequency.  5G service provided voice and data service.  Mr. Strauss' 
analysis was erroneous. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether there were any rules or ideas for 
providing notice to residents. 
Mr. Lait responded no.  Staff was considering an amendment to require the 
City to provide notice.   
Council Member Cormack asked if Council Members needed to disclose ex 
parte communications. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, answered yes. 
Vice Mayor Burt asked if the Applicant was required to review all feasible 
alternatives and the potential coverage of the alternatives.   
Mr. Lait indicated the Ordinance required the Applicant to submit alternatives 
but did not specify a number or require the Applicant to list all feasible 
alternatives.   
Vice Mayor Burt commented that the provision allowed an Applicant to offer 
any alternative, including irrelevant alternatives.  He asked if the Applicant 
offered all relevant and feasible alternatives.   
Mr. Albritton explained that the 5G signal traveled only about 500 feet.  The 
Applicant designed a small cell network that minimized the number of poles 
and utilized existing infrastructure.  Therefore, alternatives were generally 
located within a 500-foot radius of a proposed site.  The radius determined 
the number of poles considered.  Coverage maps were not relevant because 
only poles with coverage similar to that provided by proposed poles were 
considered. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 30 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt questioned whether screening had to be minimal or 
consistent throughout the year.   
Mr. Lait read two standards for screening of WCF.  Neither standard 
indicated a particular type of tree for screening.  If the Council found that 
the Applicant did not meet objective standards for screening, an exception 
was needed or the Council was able to utilize that fact to deny the 
application.   
Mr. Strauss stated that Verizon's map or drawings reflected the coverage 
that resulted from the proposed location.  There was no comparison of 
alternatives and no way to determine which alternatives may be appropriate 
to meet the objective.   
Council Member Stone disclosed meetings with Ms. Fleming and Verizon 
representatives, where he received no information or materials that were not 
already in the public record.  He inquired whether the Telecommunications 
Act qualified the level of service that wireless carriers were allowed to claim 
as service gaps. 
Aylin Bilir, Deputy City Attorney, did not believe the statute provided a 
specific definition of service. 
Mr. Albritton indicated that the standards changed with the 2018 Small Cell 
Order.  For small cells, wireless carriers needed to show that they were 
densifying the network, enhancing the network, or providing a new service 
such that denial of the facilities materially inhibited the provision of personal 
wireless service.  Wireless carriers did not have to meet the significant gap, 
least intrusive means standard applied to macro cells.  Case law stated that 
a gap could be in a certain type of service.  The Applicant was enhancing 
network services by providing a new service.   
Mr. Strauss reported no court case addressed the standard that the FCC 
purported to establish in the 2018 Small Cell Order for a violation of the 
Telecommunication Act of 1996.  The statutory language did not change in 
any way.  Over the past 20 years, the Ninth Circuit established the same 
significant gap standard, and there was no basis in the statute to change 
that.  The cases to which Mr. Albritton referred dealt with changes from 2G 
to 3G and recognized functional differences in services.  There was not a 
functional difference between 4G and 5G.   
Council Member Kou inquired whether the two existing WCF and the 
proposed WCF at Channing House were going to create overlapping RF 
emissions that affected people in and around the facilities. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 31 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
Mr. Lait referred to Slide 12 of the presentation.  Pedestrians were going to 
receive very little RF exposure, and exposure was going to fall within FCC 
guidelines.  A Condition of Approval required signage to notify people 
working in trees of RF emissions.  Cumulative RF exposure was studied and 
found not to exceed FCC standards.   
Council Member Kou requested comment regarding a Fire Inspector's 
concerns about RF emissions. 
Mr. Lait indicated the Staff member was likely not familiar with technical 
requirements for RF emissions. 
Mr. Afflerbach explained that he calculated RF exposure for the new facility.  
RF exposure was less than 2 percent of the FCC maximum for pedestrians 
walking by the facility.  To exceed the 2 percent exposure, a person had to 
be within 4 feet of the antenna.  Facilities had to be turned off when workers 
were maintaining trees.  Cumulative exposure from one or three antennas 
did not exceed FCC limits. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Stone 
to uphold the appeal denying one or more WCF Nodes based on: 
A. 
Procedural noticing requirements due to misleading notices to 
residents and the omission of notices to certain residents; and  
B. 
Compliance Grounds due to not meeting the City’s objective and 
design standards, specifically the single shroud and an inadequate 
screening.  
Council Member Kou remarked that residents had high expectations for their 
quality of life and for notification of impacts to their quality of life.  The new 
design needed to be vetted. 
Council Member Stone felt the Applicant was requesting too many 
exceptions from objective standards.  The Telecommunications Act, FCC 
rulings, and case law did not preclude the City's objective standards.   
Ms. Stump advised the Council to make findings for upholding the appeal 
and overturning the Director's Determination.  Staff prepared some findings 
for this possibility but requested an opportunity to prepare specific and 
detailed findings if the Council chose to move in this direction. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by 
Council Member Filseth to deny the appeal and uphold the initial Director’s 
Determination and that the screening is provided by trees that have foliage 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 32 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
throughout the year, and that the applicant conducts additional outreach to 
residents of Channing House including participation. 
Council Member Cormack noted the Council needed to revise a few areas of 
the WCF Ordinance.  Staff's diligent application of objective standards over 
time and responses to the Appellant were persuasive. 
Council Member Filseth believed the Applicant needed to remedy the failure 
to notify Channing House residents.  Compliance with objective standards 
was not sufficiently conclusive to overturn the Director's Determination. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed that noticing was insufficient, and the 
Substitute Motion provided a remedy.  He inquired whether a single shroud 
was technically infeasible. 
Mr. Lait reiterated that the Applicant and consultant indicated that a single 
shroud for all three antennas degraded the signal from the node.  Objective 
standards provided an adjustment for this condition. 
Vice Mayor Burt requested clarification of adjustment. 
Mr. Lait explained that the adjustment stated an antenna that was not able 
to provide an appropriate signal with shrouding was subject to a volumetric 
standard for each antenna.  If the Council wished to pursue a single shroud, 
the Council needed to consider an exception because the design did not 
comply with the volumetric criteria. 
Vice Mayor Burt inquired whether the Substitute Motion necessitated a break 
for Staff to prepare detailed and additional findings. 
Ms. Stump advised that Staff may require time to consider findings for the 
screening condition. 
Mr. Lait reported screening one node on Middlefield Road with a tree was 
problematic.  Staff needed to understand whether the Council intended to 
screen each node with an evergreen tree.   
Mr. Sauls advised that Node 061's proposed location was screened by two 
existing littleleaf linden trees.  Staff included a Condition of Approval for 
replacement of one of the trees with a similar tree.  The proposed node 
location adjacent to Channing House was screened by two ash trees, and the 
two were going to remain.  The proposed location for Node 205 was 
screened by deciduous trees located on private property.  It was possible to 
plant an amenity tree on one side of the proposed node, but not on the 
opposite side due to underground infrastructure and a driveway.  An existing 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 33 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
street tree was located approximately 75 feet away from the proposed node 
location.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the Applicant recommended the planting 
of Chinese pistache trees.   
Mr. Sauls answered no. 
INCORPORATED 
INTO 
THE 
SUBSTITUTE 
MOTION 
WITH 
THE 
CONSENT OF THE MAKER AND SECONDER: to remove, ”… and that the 
screening is provided by trees that have foliage throughout the year … .” 
Ms. Stump reported Staff did not need time to draft findings in support of 
the Substitute Motion. 
Mr. Lait requested a timeframe for the community meeting given the 15 
days remaining on the shot clock. 
Council Member Cormack proposed 10 days. 
Council Member Filseth felt that was too soon and suggested the Council 
approach the Applicant about extending the shot clock. 
Vice Mayor Burt inquired whether the shot clock was binding since the 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient notice. 
Mr. Lait indicated noticing requirements were not a component of the federal 
statute specifying time limits. 
Ms. Bilir clarified that the Substitute Motion upheld the Director's 
Determination, and that was subject to the shot clock.  If the Council denied 
the entire application, the shot clock was no longer applicable.  Noticing 
requirements were not related to the shot clock. 
Mr. Lait proposed a tolling agreement of 45 days for the Applicant to hold a 
community meeting and submit applications for relevant permits.   
Mr. Albritton agreed to a 45-day extension of the shot clock for Node 204. 
INCORPORATED 
INTO 
THE 
SUBSTITUTE 
MOTION 
WITH 
THE 
CONSENT OF THE MAKER AND SECONDER: to add “... on Nodes 061 and 
205, extend shot clock through a tolling agreement for 45 days on Node 
204, and require … .” 
Vice Mayor Burt felt Council Members were frustrated by the inability to 
judge applications based on subjective standards.  A range of arguments 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 34 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
were provided to the Council.  He supported the Substitute Motion based on 
comments from City Staff and consultants. 
Council Member Tanaka did not understand why a single shroud was not 
possible.  If the Substitute Motion contained that provision, he would 
support it. 
Mr. Afflerbach reported that a single shroud covering all the antennas was 
going to exceed the size limitation.  A single shroud reduced the signal 
coverage significantly and required many more WCF.  As proposed, there 
were no shrouds over the antennas.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if there was a way to make the WCF more 
pleasing.   
Mr. Afflerbach was not able to provide an alternative. 
Mr. Lait noted that the Council had the option to deny the node on the basis 
of it not complying with the objective standard.  However, if it was not 
technically feasible to design the antenna to fit within volumetric 
requirements, the City was effectively prohibiting service, and that was 
prohibited.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the ability to fill the gaps between 
antennas so that they appeared as one unit. 
Mr. Stroup reported a shroud was limited to a diameter of 15 inches, and 
three antennas did not fit within a shroud of that size.   
Mr. Lait clarified that additional screening between the antennas increased 
the volumetric size such that it did not comply with the objective standard.   
Mr. Stroup added that covering all three antennas with a single shroud 
resulted in gaps between material, and design standards did not allow gaps 
between material.  Without gaps, the signal was not able to adequately 
propagate.  The adjustment was provided for equipment that was not able to 
propagate an adequate signal within shrouding required by the standard 
design and imposed a volumetric limit. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION AS AMENDED:  Council Member Cormack moved, 
seconded by Council Member Filseth to: 
A. 
Deny the appeal and uphold the initial Director’s Determination on 
Nodes 061 and 205; 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 35 of 35 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  6/22/2021 
B. 
Extend the shot clock through a tolling agreement for 45 days on Node 
204; and  
C. 
Require that the applicant conducts additional outreach to residents of 
Channing House including participation. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION PASSED:  4-2 DuBois absent, Kou, Stone no 
Council took a break at 11:41 P.M. and returned at 11:50 P.M. 
CONTINUED ITEM 6 at 11:50 P.M. 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Stone inquired about the process for calling a Special 
Meeting to discuss an eviction moratorium. 
Vice Mayor Burt recalled that action by the Legislature was anticipated in the 
next week, and that action would determine the need for a Special Meeting. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, reported either the Mayor or a majority of the 
Council was allowed to call a Special Meeting.  Presumably, the Mayor 
intended to call a Special Meeting if the Legislature did not act.  Four Council 
Members constituted a quorum for a Special Meeting, and four-fifths of 
Council Members present were needed to adopt an Urgency Ordinance for an 
eviction moratorium. 
Vice Mayor Burt added that a Special Meeting was unlikely given the 
Legislature's interest in eviction protections. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 12:23 A.M. in honor of 
Talanoa Tuifua, or “Ms. Noa” as most knew her by, who passed last week, an 
Administrative Services Department employee for over 20 years. 
