CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 18 
Special Meeting 
March 23, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:01 P.M. 
Participating Remotely:  Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone; Tanaka 
arrived at 6:16 P.M. 
Absent: 
 
Study Session 
1. 
Study Session on Connecting Palo Alto Rail Grade Separation: Receive 
and Discuss Final Report From the Expanded Community Advisory 
Panel (XCAP). 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported discussion of grade separations began 
more than ten years ago and was driven by alignment of Caltrain and 
California High Speed Rail (CHSR) and Caltrain's electrification.  The City 
evaluated the trenching alternative in 2014 and conducted technical 
analyses of 34 alternatives in 2018.  In 2019, the Council narrowed the 
alternatives to seven for further evaluation and formed the Expanded 
Community Advisory Panel (XCAP).  The Council identified the project need 
and hopefully was moving to selection of the alternatives that allowed the 
City to seek funding.  In most cases, agencies did not commit significant 
funding for detailed design and construction until there was a preferred 
alternative.  While the City expended significant funds to reach the current 
point, funding was going to increase on the order of magnitudes for next 
steps.  Potential next steps were to review detailed alternatives, invite 
regional partners to discuss concerns and questions, narrow the number of 
alternatives, direct Staff to conduct additional studies of select alternatives, 
and direct Staff to prepare the Project Study Report.   
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, advised that three of seven rail 
crossings were already grade-separated.  Caltrain electrification was going to 
increase the frequency of trains and cause gate down times to increase to 15 
percent of each hour.   
Millette Litzinger, AECOM, indicated three alternatives were being considered 
for the Churchill Avenue crossing:  closure with mitigations, a viaduct, and a 
partial underpass.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Peter DeStefano, AECOM, reviewed Options 1 and 2 for the Churchill Avenue 
closure with mitigations.  In Option 1, ramps ran parallel to the train tracks, 
descended into an approximately 45-foot-long tunnel, and ascended on the 
opposite side of the tracks.  The configuration was intended to preserve the 
existing Embarcadero bike path.  In Option 2, a pedestrian path passed 
beneath Alma Street and the train tracks.   
Gary Black, Hexagon Consultant, related that closure of Churchill was going 
to divert traffic to Embarcadero and Oregon Expressway/Page Mill Road.  A 
study found that Embarcadero was going to need changes to accommodate 
the increase in traffic.   
Ms. Litzinger reviewed the viaduct alternative.  Rail tracks began rising near 
Homer Avenue, extended over Churchill, and returned to the existing 
elevation near the California Avenue station.  This was the most expensive 
alternative for Churchill, and closure was the least expensive alternative.   
Mr. DeStefano reviewed the partial underpass alternative.  Churchill Avenue 
was going to be lowered from east of Castilleja Avenue, extend beneath the 
train tracks, and form a new T-intersection with Alma Street, which was 
going to be approximately 20 feet below the existing grade.  A pedestrian 
tunnel was located at Kellogg Avenue.   
Ms. Litzinger reported the alternatives for the Meadow-Charleston crossing 
were a viaduct, a trench, a hybrid, an underpass, a tunnel for passenger and 
freight trains, and a tunnel for passenger trains with freight trains traveling 
at grade.  In the viaduct alternative, the railroad was going to be elevated 
approximately 20 feet above Meadow Drive and Charleston Road.  In the 
trench alternative, the rail tracks were going to be lowered into a trench and 
pass beneath Meadow and Charleston.  This alternative required diversion of 
Adobe and Barron Creeks.  For the hybrid alternative, the rail tracks were 
raised approximately 15 feet above Meadow and Charleston, and Meadow 
Drive, Charleston Street, and Alma Street were partially lowered.   
Mr. DeStefano reviewed the underpass alternative.  Meadow Drive was going 
to be lowered beneath the tracks and Alma Street.  A separated 
pedestrian/bicycle path traveled along the south side of Meadow.  This 
alternative required some partial property acquisitions and two full property 
acquisitions.  Pedestrian bridges were located over Meadow along each side 
of the rail tracks.  Charleston Road was also going to be lowered beneath the 
rail tracks and Alma Street.  A separated pedestrian/bicycle path was located 
on the north side of Charleston.  This alternative required some partial 
property acquisitions and three full property acquisitions.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Ms. Litzinger reviewed the tunnel alternative for passenger and freight 
trains.  The rail tracks were going to be lowered into a trench from Oregon 
Expressway to approximately Loma Verde, extend through a tunnel to just 
south of Charleston Road, and return to a trench.  The tunnel was going to 
be approximately 34 feet in diameter, and the rail tracks were going to be 
approximately 60 feet below the existing elevation.  This alternative required 
the diversion of Adobe and Matadero Creeks.  The tunnel alternative with 
freight trains at grade was similar to the tunnel alternative for both freight 
and passengers trains, but the tunnel was going to be 30 feet in diameter 
and 70 feet below the existing elevation.   
Mr. Kamhi suggested Council invite Caltrain Staff to speak at a future 
meeting.  City Staff planned to meet with Caltrain Staff again in April 2021. 
Nadia Naik, XCAP Chair, thanked XCAP members, Staff, consultants, and 
volunteer engineers for their extensive work on the alternatives.  In May 
2020, the XCAP learned of Caltrain's new Rail Corridor Policy that impacted 
the alternatives.  Grade separations were critical to improve regional transit 
and local traffic.  At some point, the Council's role was going to change from 
decision-maker to advocate for the preferred alternative.  Caltrain's 
Corridor-Wide Grade Separation Study was delayed to early 2021 and likely 
delayed further.  The City potentially needed to push Caltrain to provide 
technical and policy standards prior to completion of the study.  While CHSR 
claimed that passing tracks were not needed, Caltrain claimed two additional 
passing tracks were needed for CHSR.  If there were four tracks, grade 
separation was required by law, in which case Caltrain indicated CHSR must 
fund grade separation.  Caltrain's Business Plan reflected a four-track 
segment from the area around the California Avenue station toward 
Mountain View.  A new, more conservative approach reflected a four-track 
segment from the San Francisquito Creek Bridge to the Mountain View 
station.  Caltrain's Rail Corridor Use Policy (RCUP) indicated that Caltrain 
must approve alternatives, and alternatives must not preclude the possibility 
of four tracks.  The XCAP did not study four-track alternatives.  Because the 
right-of-way at Churchill was only 72 feet wide, four tracks may not be 
possible at this crossing.  The Palo Alto Avenue crossing was not included in 
the XCAP's process.  Consultants identified El Palo Alto Heritage Tree, the 
historic San Francisquito Creek Bridge, and the Palo Alto Avenue station 
platform as constraints for a grade separation of Palo Alto Avenue.  Caltrain 
decided to replace the San Francisquito Creek Bridge, and the replacement 
project was potentially going to dictate the design of the Palo Alto Avenue 
grade separation.  Thus, the City needed to begin working with Caltrain and 
Menlo Park.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Larry Klein, XCAP Vice Chair, noted the federal infrastructure program was a 
likely source of funding for grade separations and urged the Council to begin 
advocating for the inclusion of grade separations in the program.  The XCAP 
voted 6-3 to support Option 2 of the closure alternative for Churchill because 
of its lower cost, aesthetic appeal, and improved safety and voted 7-2 to 
suggest additional mitigations.  The Council needed to consider the future of 
the Embarcadero Road grade separation.   
Ms. Naik advised that the XCAP unanimously recommended removing the 
South Palo Alto tunnel alternatives from consideration due to cost, 
construction time, and environmental impacts.  The XCAP did not reach 
consensus 
regarding 
a 
recommendation 
for 
the 
Meadow-Charleston 
alternatives.  In fact, a majority of XCAP members did not agree on a 
recommendation.  The XCAP recommended the Council update the 
alternative selection criteria; review the Comprehensive Plan, 2012 Bicycle 
and Pedestrian Transportation Plan, and 2012 Rail Corridor Study; formalize 
a system for feedback from key stakeholders; conduct additional community 
outreach; prepare a noise and vibration addendum; hire an urban designer; 
continue advocacy with Caltrain; adopt a strategy to ensure safety along the 
Palo Alto Corridor; and conduct interim technical work regarding the 
underpass 
alternative, 
bicycle/pedestrian 
crossings, 
geotechnical 
and 
groundwater analysis, and traffic mitigations.  The XCAP supported studies 
of bicycle and pedestrian crossings of Seale and Alma and Loma Verde and 
Alma.  The XCAP suggested the Council utilize Measure B funding to conduct 
hydraulics and geotechnical studies to narrow alternatives and determine 
constructability.   
Tom Kellerman remarked that the XCAP's recommended mitigations for 
closure of the Churchill crossing did not fulfill the Council's June 2018 
Motion, which required the Council to study additional options for addressing 
traffic in the Embarcadero Road underpass area and commit to adopting 
appropriate mitigations to address the impacts. 
Susan Newman, speaking for Susan Mitchell, Lawrence Lau, Kate McKenzie, 
Jim Cornett, and Kathy Jordan, noted the XCAP process identified significant 
problems and unanswered questions regarding grade separations.  The 
issues associated with the Churchill crossing needed an informed discussion 
of the alternatives rather than a recommendation.  The traffic study was 
inadequate for anticipating the true impacts of closure on vehicular and 
bicycle traffic.  The XCAP did not adequately represent the community.  
Closing Churchill did not fulfill the key requirements to facilitate movement 
across the corridor for all modes of traffic and to maintain access to 
neighborhood parks and schools.  She urged the Council to consider all 
alternatives for Churchill Avenue.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Steve Carlson, speaking for Karen Hohner, Lissa Nissim, Theo Nissim, and 
Renee Kollias, shared the methodology and results of a second survey of 
Southgate residents.  A majority of respondents opposed closure of Churchill 
and supported a partial underpass.   
Inder Monga, speaking for Barbara Hazlitt, Rachel Kellerman, Sara Girton, 
Dexter Girton, and Reshma Singh, provided the results of a survey of 
neighborhoods not represented on the XCAP.  A majority of respondents 
preferred no build with safety improvements, and 90 percent of respondents 
opposed closing Churchill.  He urged the Council to take a holistic view and 
prioritize solutions for South Palo Alto.   
Eduardo Llach supported the closure of Churchill and concurred with Mr. 
Klein's comments. 
Young-Jeh Oh implored the Council to support closure of Churchill with 
mitigations because it was the most cost-effective alternative, required the 
least amount of construction and disruption, and provided the best access 
for pedestrians and bicyclists. 
Jason Stinson supported the closure of Churchill and urged the Council to 
accept the XCAP recommendation. 
Keri Wagner was not aware of any of her Charleston-Meadow neighbors who 
supported the viaduct alternative.  She requested the Council study a 
pedestrian and bicycle crossing of Loma Verde.   
Mark Lawrence commented that the Council's highest priority was to 
improve east-west connectivity for all modes of transportation.  There was 
no reason to close an existing east-west connection.  Ten thousand people 
utilized Churchill Avenue daily.   
Teri Llach supported closure of Churchill Avenue as it was the least 
expensive, best, and easiest alternative.  Conducting additional traffic 
studies was not logical.  Traffic on Churchill Avenue was not safe.   
Arnout Boelens agreed with the XCAP recommendation for Churchill Avenue 
if mitigation measures were utilized to prevent additional car traffic in 
neighborhoods.  He urged the Council to study the options for Charleston-
Meadow and to involve relevant stakeholders.   
Stephen Rosenblum indicated acceptance of recommendations at face value 
was a violation of the Council's duty.  He supported the viaduct alternative 
because 
it 
provided 
equity 
for 
everyone 
and 
improved 
east-west 
connectivity. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Drew noted the Caltrain Business Plan included a high-growth scenario that 
could drive a four-track system for passing.   
Mohamed Hadidi asked the Council to accept the XCAP's recommendation for 
closure of Churchill with mitigations.  A partial underpass and a viaduct were 
going to impact the residential character of the neighborhood. 
David Epstein stated representation on the XCAP was important, and 
residents of Southgate, Professorville, and University South were not 
represented on the XCAP.   
David Kennedy believed the XCAP was constrained by several criteria, the 
most significant of which was the perception that property acquisition was 
not to be considered.  The Council needed to explore modest underpasses at 
crossings.   
James Silver supported the lowered options at the Charleston and Meadow 
intersections.  The underpass was particularly desirable because it minimized 
environmental impacts.  Raised options divided the community and were 
unsightly.   
Michael Price felt the current design of the partial underpass for Churchill 
Avenue was more appropriate for a freeway than an intersection.  Legitimate 
concerns and uncertainties needed to be addressed with a complete 
investigation of all aspects of a partial underpass.  Moving forward without 
exploring alternatives thoroughly was a serious mistake. 
Anke Faber commented that the Churchill crossing was dangerous and 
supported closure as the most efficient solution. 
Carlin Otto stated the viaduct and hybrid alternatives put trains above 
single-story 
homes 
in 
the 
Greenmeadow 
and 
Charleston 
Meadows 
neighborhoods.  The two raised alternatives were going to increase noise 
and create a huge visual barrier across the middle of the City. 
Gabriela Hakeman expressed concern regarding emergency response times 
if Churchill was closed.   
Mary Sylvester raised concerns regarding conflicts of interest and equity.  A 
good solution increased connectivity. 
Terry Holzemer referred to issues with the analyses listed on Pages 68 and 
69 of the Report.  The deficiencies needed further examination, particularly 
geographic equity and the irreversible nature of decisions.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Neva Yarkin supported the closure of Churchill because it increased safety 
for bicyclists. 
Council took a break at 7:49 P.M. and returned at 8:01 P.M. 
Council Member Kou acknowledged public comments regarding the XCAP not 
representing the entirety of the community.  She requested Ms. Naik 
respond to Mr. Holzemer's comments regarding the analyses. 
Ms. Naik explained that three members of the XCAP disagreed with the 
majority opinion, and Pages 68 and 69 addressed the reasons the members 
dissented.  The members believed the traffic studies at that time were not 
sufficient.  The majority agreed in that they supported suggestions to 
improve future studies.  The Embarcadero Bridge was a concern for all XCAP 
members, but the concerns were not sufficient to prevent the majority from 
supporting closure of Churchill.  The dissenting members felt the underpass 
was not fully reviewed and discussed, but it was a possible compromise if 
the design flaws were resolved.  Churchill was an east-west connection 
across Palo Alto, and closing the Churchill crossing meant it was never going 
to be reopened.  Consequently, the dissenting members wanted to consider 
the impacts on the surrounding area.   
Council Member Kou indicated the Council needed to develop other east-
west connections before closing Churchill.  The renderings of the underpass, 
especially the southern portion, did not appear to be as accurate as the hand 
drawings.   
Mr. Klein advised that Ms. Naik and her dissenting colleagues were close to 
acknowledging that the underpass did not seem to be feasible.  The majority 
felt more strongly that it was not feasible and that revising the design was 
not a good expenditure of public funds.  More time was spent on revising the 
design of the Churchill underpass.   
Mr. Kamhi reported the initial underpass proposal was highly conceptual.  
Staff and the consultants attempted to revise the design so that it functioned 
within the transportation network.  Staff, consultants, and the XCAP's 
Technical Advisory Committee worked with Ms. Alexis to create a design that 
worked in the real environment. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the XCAP believed the Charleston underpass 
was worth additional refinement. 
Ms. Naik answered yes, primarily because it was the only alternative that did 
not impact four tracks. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether the XCAP might have reached a 
majority opinion if land acquisitions were not a factor. 
Ms. Naik did not wish to speculate. 
Council Member Filseth requested clarification of the dissenting opinion 
regarding the Churchill closure. 
Ms. Naik noted the dissenting members prepared a list of items that 
improved the underpass if there was time for additional iterations.  The 
minority's main concerns were that the traffic study did not seem to address 
the entire network.  The dissenting members also focused on the 
Embarcadero and Palo Alto Avenue grade separations because more east-
west connections and better connections to Alma relieved enough pressure 
that the Churchill closure was not as significant.  An additional factor for the 
dissenting members was the fact that relieving problems for one area 
pushed traffic elsewhere.   
Council Member Filseth asked if Caltrain electrification affected gate down 
times during all or some hours of the day. 
Mr. Kamhi did not have that information. 
Council Member Filseth assumed traffic volume was greatest at the 
Charleston crossing. 
Ms. Naik replied yes, when compared to the crossings under discussion for 
grade separations. 
Council Member Filseth requested the crossing with the second greatest 
traffic volume. 
Ms. Naik did not remember.  There was not a linear connection between 
train frequency and the length of delay.  Before the pandemic, Caltrain was 
talking about increasing frequency to 16 trains.  Under the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), Caltrain had the right to operate more 
trains even if vehicular traffic had to wait. 
Council Member Filseth suggested criteria to prioritize grade separations 
may include traffic volume. 
Ms. Naik noted the distance between Charleston and Meadow was so small 
that they had to be considered together.  A hybrid and an underpass were 
the only combination where that was possible. 
Mayor DuBois related that Palo Alto Avenue had the greatest traffic volume. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Council Member Stone inquired whether the XCAP began with 14 members, 
but only nine voted on the Charleston grade crossing. 
Ms. Naik indicated that was correct.   
Council Member Stone wanted to understand how closing Churchill was 
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan's statement to prioritize grade 
separations to improve east-west connections. 
Ms. Naik reported the XCAP reviewed the Council criteria and policy 
documents.  Ultimately, the vote represented the members' thoughts based 
on their application of factors.  The criteria were separated into tiers, and 
the XCAP discussed changing that but did not present anything to Council.  
The XCAP tacitly agreed to ignore the tiers and apply the criteria.  For a 
subset of the majority, the low cost was the primary criteria. 
Mr. Klein commented that in some ways the Comprehensive Plan and the 
Council criteria were not consistent.  There was never going to be a perfect 
alternative.  The majority viewed the cost, aesthetics, an improved bicycle 
and pedestrian crossing in Option 2, and increased safety as supporting 
closure as the best alternative.   
Council Member Stone asked if traffic signals were required at the 
intersections of Oregon Expressway, Kingsley, and Embarcadero with Alma 
under the partial underpass alternative for Churchill. 
Ms. Naik explained that the consultant did not propose traffic mitigations 
because the partial underpass did not divert traffic as the closure did.  The 
XCAP generally believed that many mitigations at the main intersections 
were needed whether or not grade separations occurred.   
Council Member Cormack noted the six XCAP members who were unable to 
continue serving on the XCAP.  Ms. Naik and Mr. Klein were models of cordial 
disagreement.  She inquired whether the XCAP felt the reasons for grade 
separations were clear to the community.  
Ms. Naik remarked that the community's understanding had progressed 
considerably 
since 
2009. 
 
The 
conversation 
was 
becoming 
more 
sophisticated, but community education needed to continue.   
Mr. Klein added that without grade separations, there was going to be 
uncurable traffic queues.   
Vice Mayor Burt recalled that the initial alternatives for Churchill were 
proposed in 2017, and in 2018 the community opposed the hybrid 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
alternative 
because 
of 
significant 
property 
acquisitions 
and 
traffic 
inducement.  He asked if that was an accurate characterization of the 
reasons for eliminating the hybrid alternative. 
Ms. Naik responded yes, but a proper traffic study had not been conducted 
to consider changes to the design of the hybrid alternative.  The City's first 
traffic consultant found no impacts resulted from the closure of Churchill.   
Vice Mayor Burt commented that support for the closure alternative seemed 
to be a reaction to the hybrid alternative.  He inquired whether a no-build 
alternative with mitigations was ever considered, whether it met the City's 
needs in the medium-term, and whether it allowed the Council to delay a 
decision regarding the Churchill crossing to the end. 
Mr. Kamhi reported a no-build alternative was not presented to the public.  A 
no-build scenario was included in environmental studies of the preferred 
alternative.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the extent that funding was a 
constraint on the XCAP's discussions. 
Ms. Naik noted that the Council directed the XCAP not to consider funding. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if cost was a factor in the XCAP's 
deliberations. 
Ms. Naik explained that the cost of the South Palo Alto tunnel and the 
environmental impacts and property acquisitions associated with the two 
South Palo Alto crossings forced the XCAP to realize those alternatives were 
not feasible.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the use of federal stimulus funding 
for grade separations. 
Mr. Shikada understood federal funding was going to be expended in the 
next few years.  Constructing the grade separations in the next few years 
was not possible. 
Mr. Kamhi added that once a project was defined, Staff planned to compete 
for federal funding. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about funding sources for the millions of 
dollars needed for grade separations. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Mr. Kamhi advised that the City was slated to receive Measure B funding for 
grade separations.  Staff intended to leverage that funding for additional 
funding. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether the Santa Clara County  
Transportation Authority (VTA) still planned to utilize Measure B funding for 
the Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART). 
Mr. Kamhi replied no.   
Council Member Tanaka requested Staff's perspective regarding public 
comment about freeway-like exits from Churchill. 
Mr. Kamhi related that the exit ramps were not conservative but designed to 
operate within realistic operational situations.   
Ms. Litzinger clarified that the ramp design was based on local street 
standards. 
Mayor DuBois remarked that the report was an extensive record of years of 
work.  He inquired whether CHSR was presented as a two-track system in 
2011. 
Ms. Naik advised that CHSR presented a four-track system in 2008.  The 
2012 blended system was primarily a two-track system with passing tracks.   
Mayor DuBois asked if the Environmental Impact Report (EIR) was based on 
a two-track system with passing tracks. 
Ms. Naik replied yes. 
Mayor DuBois requested the date that four tracks became an issue and the 
rationale for AECOM not including the four-track system in its analysis. 
Mr. Kamhi indicated he became aware of the four-track system when 
Caltrain notified the City that any design for grade separation was not to 
preclude the possibility of a four-track system. 
Ms. Naik related that the track system was undetermined until Caltrain's 
Business Plan clarified that passing tracks were needed for CHSR only. 
Mayor DuBois inquired whether the decision on a two-track or four-track 
system was years away. 
Ms. Naik reiterated Caltrain's requirement for grade separation designs not 
to preclude the possibility of four tracks.  The City was allowed to design a 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
two-track viaduct or hybrid, but it had to demonstrate that the design 
accommodated four tracks.  Caltrain also told CHSR that CHSR had to pay 
for the design of four tracks.  In order to accept CHSR funding if CHSR 
failed, Caltrain had to show good intent for CHSR to operate on the Corridor.  
There were several political issues for the Council to address. 
Mayor DuBois asked if the CHSR EIR was invalid with the change to four 
tracks. 
Ms. Naik indicated the EIR found four tracks were not needed because 
Caltrain had to wait.  Caltrain then indicated it was not going to wait.  CHSR 
was seeking funding from the Legislature, and the Administration was 
friendly to CHSR.  The situation was filled with complexities. 
Mr. Shikada noted the City commented on the EIR and called attention to 
the problem. 
Council Member Kou recognized Michael Price, Michael Chacon, and Elizabeth 
Alexis for proposing alternatives and concepts.  She inquired about a 
possible timeframe for Caltrain and Union Pacific to provide information that 
clarified design criteria.   
Mr. Klein commented that the Council had to apply pressure on them and 
the Legislature.   
Council Member Kou suggested Vice Mayor Burt was going to begin working 
on the issues at meetings of the Local Policy Maker Group (LPMG).   
Ms. Naik indicated the upcoming Grade Corridor Study was an opportunity to 
ask questions.  In the past, Former Mayor Klein and Vice Mayor Burt were 
actively engaged in discussions with the community, jurisdictions, and 
Caltrain regarding grade separations and CHSR.  Other jurisdictions also 
understood the necessity for information and the small details that increased 
costs by millions of dollars.   
Mr. Kamhi noted Caltrain provided design criteria, and the process allowed 
the City to seek an exemption from design criteria.   
Council Member Filseth asked if a second bicycle and pedestrian tunnel was 
needed in all the alternatives for Churchill. 
Ms. Naik clarified that a second bicycle and pedestrian tunnel was needed for 
mitigation.   
Council Member Cormack inquired about the XCAP's proposed revisions to 
the Council criteria. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Ms. Naik reported provisions of the Comprehensive Plan seemed to conflict 
with respect to the importance of vehicles and bicycles and pedestrians.  
Policy makers and Staff needed to explore the nexus between grade 
separations and policies.  Otherwise, the XCAP did not have specific 
suggestions.   
Council Member Cormack expressed concern regarding the opposition to 
property acquisition resulting from the cost to the City rather than the 
impacts to residents.  The Council needed to determine that cost was a 
primary driver.   
Mr. Klein related that the XCAP did not rule out property acquisition but 
considered it a factor.   
Ms. Litzinger advised that the Churchill hybrid alternative significantly 
impacted 14 residential properties and required 8 driveway modifications.  
The reverse hybrid alternative significantly impacted 43 residential 
properties and required 3 driveway modifications.  The pedestrian 
undercrossing did not need to close for a significant period of time during 
construction under the closure and viaduct alternatives. 
Ms. Naik asked if that pertained to Options 1 and 2. 
Ms. Litzinger answered yes. 
Council Member Stone asked if Level of Service (LOS) applied to all modes of 
traffic. 
Mr. Black indicated motor vehicles only.  Other measures applied to the 
qualify of service for pedestrians, bicycles, and transit. 
Council Member Stone asked if the existing studies provided information 
about motor vehicles only. 
Mr. Black related that existing quantitative data applied to motor vehicles 
only.  The traffic studies discussed qualitative analysis of impacts to bicycles 
and pedestrians.   
Council Member Stone requested the rationale for the traffic studies ending 
in 2030.   
Mr. Black explained that it was just a name because of the 2030 General 
Plan build out. 
Council Member Stone requested the rationale for studying only six of the 
eight intersections that the XCAP recommended. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Mr. Black reported a traffic study was conducted prior to the City retaining 
Hexagon.  That study identified impacts at eight intersections, but Hexagon 
disagreed with the analysis and felt six intersections were impacted.  
Hexagon did not believe the impacts extended to the two intersections on 
Middlefield. 
Council Member Stone expressed concern about the redirection of traffic to 
other areas of Palo Alto.   
Vice Mayor Burt noted the time horizon of grade separations did not align 
with the time horizon of the Comprehensive Plan.  The Council, Staff, and 
the XCAP needed to address the conflicts within the Comprehensive Plan.  
The Comprehensive Plan intentionally maintained the permeability of 
vehicles and increased the permeability of bicycles and pedestrians.  A 
closure of Churchill decreased vehicle permeability and expanded bicycle and 
pedestrian permeability.  The Rail Corridor Study provided an opportunity for 
new design standards that applied to all grade crossings on the Peninsula.  
The Council probably needed to engage Caltrain on design standards rather 
than exceptions.  Property acquisition was not the same as eminent domain.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about Caltrain's financial status given the 
current economic situation.   
Mr. Kamhi discussed the effects of the pandemic on transit.  The latest 
federal stimulus package contained a significant amount of funding for 
transit agencies.  Measure RR was a funding source for Caltrain. 
Council 
Member 
Tanaka 
asked 
if 
decreased 
funding 
delayed 
the 
electrification project. 
Mr. Kamhi believed the project was on track.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the disadvantages of delaying a decision 
on Churchill. 
Mr. Klein related that disadvantages were potentially missing opportunities 
for Measure B funding and federal funding for infrastructure and not having 
a project ready for construction when problems occurred.   
Ms. Naik reiterated the possible impacts of the San Francisquito Creek 
Bridge replacement project.  The mitigation measures proposed for the 
Churchill closure alternative benefited the City even if grade separations did 
not occur.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Mayor DuBois asked if the XCAP recommended Council proceed with some 
aspects that Caltrain would pay for. 
Ms. Naik advised that the XCAP recommended Council proceed with 
geotechnical studies to help narrow the alternatives.  Caltrain was not 
necessarily going to pay for the studies. 
Mayor DuBois inquired about the extent that cost played in the XCAP's 
recommendation to close Churchill. 
Ms. Naik believed cost was the primary factor for a majority of XCAP 
members. 
Mr. Klein clarified that it varied by individual. 
Mayor DuBois asked if it was possible for the bicycle and pedestrian tunnel 
to lead to Palo Alto High School. 
Ms. Naik stated the path leads to the back of the football field. 
Mayor DuBois was concerned about the amount of time spent discussing 
Churchill.  The initial vote to close Churchill was held in August or September 
2018.  The Council criteria were functional and multifaceted.  The 
Comprehensive Plan statement to reduce single-occupancy vehicle (SOV) 
traffic was misinterpreted.  He wanted to understand the Churchill underpass 
alternative in detail.  The roundabout for Charleston-Meadow was 
interesting.   
Ms. Naik shared the XCAP's plans for detailed review of the alternatives and 
suggested the Council schedule a second Study Session for that review. 
Mr. Klein concurred. 
Council Member Filseth expressed interest in discussing Charleston-Meadow 
alternatives at the next Study Session. 
Council Member Cormack requested Staff's comments regarding the Palo 
Alto Avenue crossing. 
Mr. Shikada reported work on the Access Study was pending.  The issue was 
Staff's capacity for the work.   
Mr. Kamhi advised that the San Francisquito Creek Bridge was nearing the 
end of its useful life.  Caltrain budgeted $62,000 for assessment and 
outreach and selected a consultant.  Caltrain requested a meeting with Staff 
in April to discuss the project. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Council Member Cormack wanted to incorporate the Palo Alto Avenue 
crossing into grade separations.  She asked if the XCAP was designed to 
represent neighborhoods. 
Mr. Shikada indicated the original Community Advisory Panel (CAP) was 
intended to be a coalition of those interested in the project.  When the 
Council expanded the CAP's role, it added specific stakeholder groups but did 
not change the overall composition. 
Ms. Naik added that nine members of the CAP transitioned to the XCAP.  City 
Manager Shikada filled six positions on the XCAP with representatives of the 
business community, school community, Friends of Caltrain, the Council, and 
the Parks and Recreation Commission. 
Council Member Cormack believed the XCAP was designed to aid the Council 
with decisions rather than to represent neighborhoods. 
Vice Mayor Burt noted a potential multiyear closure of Charleston and East 
Meadow due to construction of grade separations.  The Council needed to 
explore routes and a crossing for school children during construction and the 
possibility of property acquisitions for a crossing.  The volunteer civil 
engineers reviewed the community's proposed alternatives and saved the 
City considerable expense.  A bicycle and pedestrian bridge near Kellogg 
may be possible with the right design and Palo Alto Unified School District's 
(PAUSD) cooperation.   
Council Member Kou expressed concern that only community members who 
followed the XCAP meetings were involved.  The community needed to be 
fully involved with the XCAP.   
Council Member Stone noted a grade separation was required for four tracks 
and asked if Caltrain stated that CHSR had to fund grade separations or the 
cost of additional tracks. 
Ms. Naik did not know.  The appendix to XCAP's report contained a history of 
grade separation funding.  Along the Peninsula Corridor, grade separations 
were constructed as traffic mitigations.  Caltrain's Rail Corridor Study had to 
consider the geographic and operational connections among grade 
separations.  The San Francisquito Creek Bridge replacement project was 
ripe for federal funding, and the Council needed to address the crossing. 
Mr. Kamhi commented that a quick return of Caltrain ridership was likely to 
result in more frequent trains.  Greater frequency attracted more riders. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Ms. Naik added that a route into San Francisco's financial district would have 
the greatest impact on Caltrain ridership.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the impacts of a tunnel along the 
entire Peninsula Corridor. 
Ms. Naik explained that such a project was an extremely complex 
engineering problem, and many other potential projects provided higher 
returns.   
Mr. Kamhi suggested funding all grade separations in the Corridor was less 
costly than a tunnel.   
Ms. Naik added that businesses within one mile of the Caltrain right-of-way 
generated 12 percent of California's gross domestic product (GDP).   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about plans for community surveys. 
Mr. Kamhi indicated surveys depended on the approach the Council chose 
for grade separations. 
Mayor DuBois asked if Caltrain planned to remove the San Francisquito 
Creek Bridge. 
Ms. Naik explained that the hybrid alternative considered relocating the new 
bridge.  She suggested Council Members visit the site to experience an 
earthen berm, which was similar to a hybrid alternative. 
Mayor DuBois asked if the XCAP considered bike bridges rather than bike 
tunnels. 
Ms. Naik answered no. 
Mayor DuBois wanted to develop a rail plan for the Council and hold a series 
of meetings to narrow alternatives, identify next steps, and establish a 
timeline.   
Tony Carrasco, XCAP Member, acknowledged the leadership of Ms. Naik and 
Mr. Klein and the positive experience of serving on the XCAP.  He urged the 
Council to explore combining positive aspects of alternatives before selecting 
an alternative. 
Gregory Brail, XCAP Member, expressed concern that delaying decisions was 
going to negatively affect the safety of residents.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  03/23/2021 
Cari 
Templeton, 
XCAP 
Member, 
emphasized 
that 
the 
XCAP's 
recommendation for Churchill was closure with mitigations.   
Keith Reckdahl, XCAP Member, felt more work on the underpasses was 
needed, and a comparison of the underpass alternatives with other 
alternatives was not fair.   
Phil Burton, XCAP Member, supported the suggestion to hold periodic 
meetings and develop action plans. 
Dave Shen, XCAP Member, remarked that the XCAP discovered many 
projects that needed implementing regardless of grade separations.   
Mr. Shikada advised that the tentative date for the next discussion of grade 
separations was April 26, 2021.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:06 P.M. 
