CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 20 
Special Meeting 
January 19, 2021 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual 
teleconference at 5:04 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH REAL PROPERTY NEGOTIATORS 
Authority: Government Code Section 54956.8 
Property:  445 Bryant Street, Assessor’s Parcel Number 120-15-107 
Negotiating Party: Tesla, Inc., a Delaware corporation 
City Negotiators:  Ed Shikada, Kiely Nose 
Subject of Potential Negotiations:  Lease Price and Terms of Payment. 
Mayor DuBois reported the Closed Session concerned direction to City 
negotiators regarding price and terms of payment for a potential license 
agreement that permitted use and occupancy of a portion of the garage for 
20 Tesla supercharging stations.  If the discussion was productive, the 
Council was going to discuss approval of the agreement in open session. 
Rebecca Eisenberg inquired regarding the City paying Tesla or Tesla paying 
the City.  The negotiations needed to include Tesla providing electric shuttles 
for its employees and construction of an underground tunnel.  She opposed 
the City paying Tesla any funds.   
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member 
Stone to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:10 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:21 P.M. 
Mayor DuBois announced no reportable action.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Study Session 
2. 
2951 El Camino Real [20PLN-00158]: Prescreening of a Proposal to 
Rezone the Subject Property From CS (Service Commercial) and R-1 
(Single-family Residential) to Planned Home Zoning (PHZ) and 
Redevelop the Site With a Mixed-use Development That Includes 
Approximately 113 new Residential Units, 5,000 Square Feet of Office 
Space, 1,000 Square Feet of Retail Space, and Provides Parking within 
a Below-grade Garage. Environmental Assessment: Not a Project; Any 
Subsequent Formal Application Would be Subject to the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Zoning District: CS and R-1. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, recalled the 
Council's adoption of the Comprehensive Plan, revisions to commercial and 
multifamily zoning, and approval of Planned Home Zoning (PHZ) to spur 
housing development.  The Council's first prescreening of this project 
occurred in October 2020.  The Applicant revised the project in response to 
comments made during the October prescreening.  The Applicant did not 
intend to pursue the Code-compliant project under the Housing Incentive 
Program (HIP) that was presented in the Staff Report because it was not 
financially feasible.  The project proposed 113 housing units, exceeded 
height limits, fulfilled the onsite affordability requirement, and provided 
housing units without creating any net new jobs.  Amendments to the 
Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Code were needed to address 
multifamily development within a Single-Family Residential (R-1) zone and 
the height limits.   
Gary Johnson, Applicant, reported the project provided housing near a 
transit corridor and proposed to deed-restrict 20 percent of housing units 
without a subsidy from the City or a nonprofit.  Market-rate units were 
intended to sustain the affordable units.  The project complied with the 
parking requirement of one space per bedroom and provided bicycle and 
pedestrian connections to the North Ventura Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP) 
area.  The project required variances to the height limit and floor area ratio 
(FAR) in order to provide affordable units.   
Sherry Scott, Architect, reviewed changes made to the project in response 
to comments made during the October 5, 2020 prescreening.  Reducing the 
number of housing units and the height reduced shading on adjacent R-1 
properties, density, and FAR.  The building height was greatest along El 
Camino Real and transitioned to adjacent R-1 properties.  Parking was 
located below grade.  Office and retail uses were located on the ground floor 
and buffered residential units from the El Camino corridor.  The project 
included street trees, wide sidewalks, and sidewalk seating to activate El 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Camino Real.  The Applicant planned to work with residential neighbors to 
develop privacy screening between the project and their properties.   
Mr. Johnson explained that exceeding the maximum allowed building height 
was necessary to make the project financially feasible.  The price of land in 
Palo Alto, steadily increasing construction costs, the number of affordable 
units, and underground parking were primary factors in the overall cost of 
the project.   
Suzanne Keehn remarked that the project violated multiple provisions of the 
Zoning Code and provided few affordable units.  This project would not be 
allowed in other areas of the City.   
Waldek K. liked the project and understood the reasons for locating taller 
buildings along El Camino.  He expressed concern that reviewing 
development projects individually and prior to adoption of the NVCAP 
undermined the purpose of the NVCAP.   
Mark Mollineaux was more concerned about constructing housing, especially 
affordable housing, than the shade on millionaires' homes.  The Council 
needed to prevent on-street parking throughout the City in order to under-
park structures. 
Salim Damerdji liked the project because it provided smaller, affordable 
housing and it was located near transit.  The Council needed to consider the 
future needs for housing.  He supported less onsite parking, higher density, 
and taller buildings.   
Rohin Ghosh remarked that this type of project provided him with a chance 
to return to his hometown following college.  With housing near transit, 
people did not have to drive their vehicles.   
Aram James wanted Black developers to propose projects.  He questioned 
the meaning of below-market-rate (BMR) units in terms of price and 
suggested setting aside in perpetuity at least 20 percent of the units for 
Blacks in reparation for previous discrimination.   
Katie Rueff felt this project was going to provide her with more opportunities 
to build a future in Palo Alto.  The project benefited people she valued and 
climate change policies.   
Kelsey Banes supported the project because it proposed affordable housing.  
Projects needed to address the displacement of tenants.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Rebecca Eisenberg advocated for the project.  The developer exceeded the 
minimum requirements in order to benefit the community.   
Daniel Allen viewed the project as a way for the Council to contribute to 
housing goals and to take action.  The location was perfect for this type of 
development.  The developer addressed the Council's and the public's 
concerns.   
Ryan Globus urged the Council to support the project.  This was an 
opportunity to construct affordable housing without utilizing taxpayer funds.   
Stephanie MacDonald supported the project.  The zoning was wrong, not the 
project.   
Raven Malone requested the Council approve the project.  The area was 
perfect for greater density.  The City needed housing for senior citizens, first 
responders, and future generations.   
Jessica Clark hoped the community considered essential workers' need for 
housing within Palo Alto.  She had been on the waiting list for affordable 
housing for ten years.  Compromises had to be made to achieve housing 
goals.   
Kevin Ma recommended the Council compromise regulations in order to 
retain local control and to achieve housing goals.   
Rob Nielsen concurred with comments from Mr. Ma and Mr. Damerdji.  The 
project was going to reduce Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT). 
Matt Bryant noted the project included rezoning two residential properties to 
commercial.  One property was occupied by an elderly person who was 
unaware that his property was affected by the project.  Other properties 
were ripe for this development.   
Keith Reckdahl indicated the project reduced office square footage and 
added residences near transit.  The NVCAP Working Group held reservations 
regarding locating tall projects near Pepper and Olive.  He suggested the 
project replace the proposed office space with retail and retail-like 
businesses.  The Council needed to refer the project to the Planning and 
Transportation Commission (PTC) and the Architectural Review Board (ARB) 
to reach compromises with the Applicant.   
Rebecca Sanders viewed upzoning as a way to increase real property prices.   
Scott O'Neil urged the Council to approve housing development so that 
future generations had places to live in Palo Alto. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Joe Hirsch concurred with comments from Ms. Keehn and Palo Alto 
Neighborhoods (PAN).  The Council needed a comprehensive review of the 
Zoning Code for properties along El Camino Real.   
Candy Soroonis preferred housing projects comply with the Zoning Code and 
not convert residential properties into commercial properties.   
Terry Holzemer asked the Council to reject the project because it violated 
zoning laws, and approving it may affect other neighborhoods.  Many 
projects that complied with requirements were financially feasible.   
Anupa Bajwa believed the project looked into adjacent neighbors' bedrooms, 
bathrooms, and yards; diminished privacy and natural light for neighbors; 
and increased traffic and parking congestion.   
Gail Price, Palo Alto Forward President, supported the project.  The creation 
of housing was impossible without more flexible regulations.  Actions were 
needed to create affordable housing and services that were part of the 
common good.   
Council Member Kou appreciated the project and the Applicant's community 
outreach.  The Applicant requested a huge up-zoning.  She preferred a     
30-percent income range for affordable housing and less office space.  The 
purpose of zoning was to protect the public.   
Mayor DuBois requested the affordability level for the affordable units. 
Mr. Johnson answered a mix of moderate-income, low-income, and 
workforce housing.  The distribution of units across categories was not 
settled. 
Mr. Lait explained that Option 1 of the PHZ required 5 percent of units to be 
dedicated to each of the very-low-income, low-income, moderate-income, 
and workforce categories.   
Mayor DuBois inquired whether the 53-foot building height included solar 
facilities. 
Mr. Johnson indicated it was possible to mount solar facilities flush on the 
upper-most rooftops or on the lower rooftops. 
Mayor DuBois appreciated the Applicant's responsiveness to comments.  He 
urged the Applicant to invest in trees and landscaping.  He supported the 
project; however, he generally did not support projects converting R-1 
properties to PHZ.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt recognized that tradeoffs were associated with the HIP and 
PHZ.  The PHZ was part of the Zoning Code.  Transitions between the 
project and R-1 properties were important.  He requested the names of the 
two R-1 property owners.   
Mr. Johnson reported Jessica Agarmande owned the parcel at 470 Olive, 
which was a commercial building zoned R-1.  Decades ago, the parcel was 
zoned Service Commercial (CS).  An individual owned the parcel at 456 
Olive.  The property owner was unable to adequately maintain the residence. 
Vice Mayor Burt requested a comparison of this project with the project 
located on the former Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) lot. 
Mr. Lait advised that the former VTA site was smaller, and the project 
proposed a 2.0 FAR, a building height of about 50 feet, and approximately 
50 units.  There was no transition between the building on the former VTA 
lot and R-1 properties. 
Vice Mayor Burt noted the project proposed more square footage for housing 
than for office and was located on the edge of El Camino and Page Mill, 
where greater density was preferred. 
Council Member Cormack requested the City's shortfall in achieving its 
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) as of 2020.   
Mr. Lait indicated the shortfall was about 950 units.  Discussions were 
underway regarding approximately 1,000 housing units.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the cost per unit in the Wilton Court 
project was approximately $750,000 and if the project proposed about $17 
million in affordable housing without the use of City funding. 
Mr. Lait commented that the project proposed a considerable amount of 
affordable housing in exchange for zoning allowances.   
Council Member Cormack remarked that the largest employers in Palo Alto 
were in the healthcare industry, and the Council was interested in ensuring 
housing was available for healthcare workers.  The Applicant fulfilled the 
Council's requests, and she supported the project moving forward. 
Council Member Filseth noted the purpose of PHZ was to increase housing 
production.  The project fell within the range of the Council's intentions for 
PHZ.  These projects needed to be spread across the City.  He inquired 
whether 120 percent of area median income (AMI) was income limited. 
Mr. Lait explained that the 120 percent was tied to AMI. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Council Member Stone appreciated the Applicant's responsiveness and 
expressed interest in more creative solutions for increasing affordable 
housing and complying with regulations.  He particularly appreciated the 
Applicant working with one property owner to prevent his displacement from 
the neighborhood.  He was concerned about the impacts of the Council's 
action regarding this project on projects in the pipeline.  The project was not 
quite ready for Council approval; however, PTC and ARB reviews may benefit 
it.  The Council needed to provide clear guidelines regarding the concessions 
it was willing to give projects.   
Council Member Tanaka hoped to see more smaller units because they were 
inherently more affordable.  Locating office and retail space along El Camino 
was a good idea.  He supported the project proceeding through the process. 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Council took a break at 8:18 P.M. and returned at 8:25 P.M. 
3. 
Discuss and Accept the Human Relations Commission's Report "Black 
and Brown Palo Alto - History and Current Experience" and Provide 
Feedback and Direction on Their Action Plan to Address Equity and 
Inclusion. 
Reverend Kaloma Smith, Human Relations Commission (HRC) Chair, 
reported the HRC was shocked by the data and intrigued by the lived 
experiences of community members.  In June 2020, the Council directed the 
HRC to review 8 Can't Wait and to prepare a report on the Black and Brown 
history and current community in Palo Alto.  He shared the variety of 
sources used to prepare the report.  The HRC identified themes of persistent 
racism, consistent aggression, the absence of positive role models, and the 
denial of housing.  Only 1.8 percent and 5.6 percent of Palo Alto's population 
identified themselves as Black or African-American and Hispanic or Latino 
respectively while 6.5 percent and 39.4 percent of California's population 
and 13.4 percent and 18.5 percent of the U.S. population identified 
themselves as Black or African-American and Hispanic or Latino respectively.  
He shared community members' personal experiences of consistent 
aggression and the absence of positive role models, and a brief history of 
discrimination in housing.  The HRC planned to equip the community for 
grassroots changes, partner with 100 community leaders to lead community 
circles, facilitate the formation of 100 community groups, compile a report 
and findings from community conversations, and ask the Council and 
community to commit to making this moment a pivot point and to commit to 
being a model for diversity, inclusion, equity, and belonging.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Aram James remarked that unjust laws needed to be remedied.  The City 
and Council needed to deal with racism within the Police Department.   
Raven Malone remarked regarding her experiences with racism while 
campaigning for the Council.  Black and Brown people needed to call out 
racism. 
Kevin Ma indicated the Council needed to make changes rather than 
continue discussions.  Discretionary enforcement exposed many biases.  The 
Council also needed to consider racial justice in the Budget process. 
Rebecca Eisenberg commented that the City's leadership appeared to 
intentionally silence Hispanic women and African-Americans.  The Council 
had to accept the HRC's report. 
Cleveland Kanard related his experiences with the Police Department and 
how those experiences destroyed his life. 
Dixie B. urged the Council to move traffic and parking patrols and mental 
wellness checks from the Police Department to trained civilians.  This was an 
opportunity for the Council to make meaningful changes to protect 
marginalized peoples in the community.   
Sunita de Tourreil felt a key component of the report was the importance of 
a sense of belonging.  Creating policies and a community that celebrated 
diversity required time.   
Lauren Bigelow advised that racial equity and housing issues were deeply 
linked.  She supported the HRC's findings and looked forward to realizing 
some of the findings. 
Council Member Stone believed the lived experiences were critical to 
understanding the impact of discrimination.  He shared his and his wife's 
experiences with discrimination.  He requested details of the HRC's plans for 
community leaders and meetings. 
Mr. Smith acknowledged the need for significant change in the Police 
Department.  Community leaders were able to influence groups of people, 
and the HRC intended to provide a curriculum for community leaders to 
influence changes in behaviors.   
Valerie Stinger, Human Relations Commission Vice Chair, added that the 
HRC wanted to create momentum within community groups to support 
policy issues.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Council Member Cormack suggested conversations among nearby neighbors 
may be more helpful than conversations in community groups.  Perhaps the 
conversations needed to include gender discrimination and suggestions for 
addressing uncomfortable topics with friends and neighbors.  Stanford 
University's undergraduate population was significantly more diverse than 
Palo Alto's population.   
Mayor DuBois pledged to continue to fight systemic racism and supported 
the concept of community circles.   
Council Member Kou noted honest conversations required two-way 
communication.  She proposed including Palo Alto Unified School District 
(PAUSD) and private schools in the conversations and discussing the need to 
fill preconceived molds in order to achieve success.   
Mr. Smith indicated the HRC was working with PAUSD on a project for Black 
History Month and the Library on a book group about anti-racism.   
Vice Mayor Burt suggested the community discussions include understanding 
students of color and building relationships among Palo Alto and East Palo 
Alto residents and faith institutions. 
Mr. Smith reported faith institutions from Palo Alto, East Palo Alto, Los Altos, 
and Menlo Park were planning a conference about race, religion, and 
systemic racism for May 2021.  Coordinating the efforts of faith leaders, 
community groups, and the HRC was going to create something special. 
Council Member Tanaka related that legislating behavior was impossible and 
supported the HRC's plans. 
Council Member Filseth commented that the Council did not intend to bury 
the role of the Independent Police Auditor (IPA) by referring it to the Policy 
and Services Committee. 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor DuBois announced Agenda Item Number 4, “Provide Feedback and 
Direction on the Community & Economic Recovery …” would be heard on 
January 25, 2021, and Agenda Item Number 5, “Formation of Working 
Group and Council Subcommittee …,” would be moved to the end of 
tonight’s agenda. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Oral Communications 
Aram James wanted to learn whether white nationalists were employed in 
the Police Department in order to prevent their terrorizing people of color.   
Mark Mollineaux indicated Palo Alto failed miserably to achieve low-income 
housing goals prior to the passage of Senate Bill (SB) 35.  Cities successfully 
utilized increased value from up-zoning to fund affordable housing.  Fully 
parking a development project resulted in more carbon emissions and lower 
transit ridership.   
Rebecca Eisenberg reported Vice Mayor Burt did not refute the evidence she 
provided regarding his previous company's environmental record.  She 
proposed Council Members disclose any interest in power plants that relied 
on the Tuolumne River.   
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported timely topics discussed in City Manager 
Comments were included in a City blog.  The Regional Stay at Home Order 
remained in effect.  A variant of COVID-19 was identified in Santa Clara 
County.  The County of Santa Clara (County) was providing information 
regarding vaccine plans via sccfreevax.org.  Administration of a specific lot 
of the Moderna vaccine was on hold due to the number of allergic reactions 
it caused.  Free COVID-19 testing was available on January 22, 2021, at 
Mitchell Park Community Center.  A high winds advisory was in effect 
through Tuesday evening.  The Utilities Department restored power to 4,400 
residents earlier in the day.  In accordance with Council direction, Fire 
Department Staff was evaluating first-time and recurring offenders of the 
Weed Abatement Ordinance to distinguish those affected by COVID-19 
restrictions.  An online survey regarding Council Priorities was available until 
January 29, 2021.  A guide for the use of Foothills Park was available online. 
Action Items 
6. 
Adoption of an Ordinance to Amend the Municipal Fee Schedule to add 
Vehicle Entrance Fees for Foothills Park, and to Amend Palo Alto 
Municipal Code (PAMC) Section 22.04.150(k) to Adjust Attendance 
Limits at Foothills Park. 
Daren Anderson, Community Services Assistant Director, reported Foothills 
Park opened to everyone on December 17, 2020 with a temporary limit of 
750 visitors at any one time.  The number of visitors between December 17, 
2020 and January 2, 2021 was six times the number of visitors for the same 
period in the previous year.  The number of visitors increased from 156,250 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
in 2019 to 222,608 in 2020.  The number of visitors dropped slightly 
following January 2, 2021.  Due to visitor capacity, Staff closed Foothills 
Park twice on January 17, 2021 and once on January 18, 2021.  Staff 
observed increased traffic on Page Mill Road and roads within the park, cars 
parking outside Foothills Park, and the creation of new social trails.  Staff 
also educated visitors regarding Leave No Trace.  Staff was utilizing traffic 
cones, signage, and a message board to manage visitors and traffic.  Staff 
implemented suggestions from stakeholders to improve visitors' experiences 
and intended to install a new vehicle counter in the next few weeks.  Staff 
recommended the Council consider an entry fee of $6 to $10 regardless of 
residence, an annual pass costing $65 to $85 for nonresidents and $50 to 
$60 for residents, a 25 percent discount on annual passes for seniors and 
low-income persons, and free entry for pedestrians, bicyclists, and 
volunteers on their workdays.  The annual operating cost for Foothills Park 
was $1.53 million.  Fees provided some cost recovery.  Staff recommended 
initiating fees on weekends as early as February 20, 2021, and purchasing 
an automated payment machine.  In addition, Staff recommended a 
maximum cap of 500 visitors or approximately 185 vehicles at any one time, 
in addition to individuals and vehicles holding facility reservations, and 
allowing the City Manager to increase the cap to a maximum of 750 visitors 
as needed.   
Jeff Greenfield, speaking as an individual and for Marilyn Keller, Gerry 
Mastellar, Keith Reckdahl, and Lakshmi Sunder, concurred with Staff's 
assessment of visitor safety and environmental impacts.  As stewards of the 
preserve, the City was responsible for balancing preservation with 
recreation.  He recommended the Council utilize an Emergency Ordinance to 
set an interim cap of 500 visitors at any one time and to allow the City 
Manager to increase the cap to a maximum of 750 visitors, utilize a standard 
Ordinance to implement fees, and refer development of an entry fee policy 
to the Parks and Recreation Commission (PARC).  Staff's approach to the 
dramatic increase in visitors was reasonable.  Empirical evidence indicated 
Foothills Park was not designed to safely accommodate the current rate of 
visitors.  Data from the spring and summer was needed for the Council to 
set a permanent visitor cap.  Implementing an entry fee was both 
appropriate and necessary to help offset additional costs.  A daily entry fee 
of $6 and annual pass fees of $60 for residents and $80 for nonresidents 
were reasonable.  Referral of development of a cash handling policy to the 
PARC was appropriate.  Implementing an online reservation system for 
visitors was not practical because visits to open space were not based on 
time. 
Mark Mollineaux advocated for charging a fee for parking at Foothills Park; 
although, the fee should be lower than that charged in other areas of the 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
City.  His friends from San Francisco visited Foothills Park over the weekend 
and found Palo Alto to be less racist than anticipated.  The novelty of 
Foothills Park was likely the reason for the dramatic increase in visitors.  He 
recommended the Council consider different fees for peak and off-peak 
visitor times. 
Jane Moss commented that it was important for Foothills Park's guiding 
philosophy and policies to promote perpetual conservation.  She questioned 
the definition of a successful opening given the many issues caused by 
increased visitation.  Visitors were too numerous.  The park was 
understaffed and offered too much parking and too much pavement.  Dogs 
needed to be banned.   
Rebecca Eisenberg opposed the implementation of any type of entrance fee 
because it negatively impacted people of color.   
Jill O’Nan opposed exempting pedestrians and bicyclists from paying an 
entry fee due to a bicyclist's recent egregious behavior towards her in 
Foothills Park. 
Kristen Zuraek concurred with Ms. Moss' comments.  The opening of 
Foothills Park negatively impacted surrounding communities, and traffic was 
unmanageable.  There was no safe path for pedestrians to access the park 
from Page Mill Road.   
Ryan Globus supported charging an entry fee and requested the rationale for 
decreasing the visitor cap.  An online reservation system was not accessible 
by everyone.   
1415***813 Irina suggested the Council form a citizens advisory committee 
to oversee preservation of Foothills Park.  Charging an entry fee and 
imposing a tax on residents to support Foothills Park was not fair.  She 
supported an online reservation system with a mobile app. 
Winter Dellenbach supported a cap of 500 visitors and questioned whether 
prohibiting parking along Page Mill Road was possible.   
Aram 
James 
requested 
the 
number 
of 
citations 
issued 
between 
December 17, 2020, and January 19, 2021, the racial makeup of Park 
Rangers, and any type of weapon Park Rangers carried in order to determine 
if Staff's recommendations were meant to exclude people of color.  The 
Council needed to exempt residents of East Palo Alto from paying entry fees.   
Moria Bradski remarked that the number of visitors made Foothills Park feel 
like a tourist trap rather than a nature preserve.  She supported charging an 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
entry fee to nonresidents only, if possible, or reducing the entry fee for 
residents; setting the cap at 500 visitors; and allowing dogs in the park by 
permit only. 
Sue Welch asked the Council to close Foothills Park until an environmental 
assessment was conducted and an appropriate use plan was prepared.  The 
change in access was impacting the park.   
Mayor DuBois noted the time of 10:30 P.M. and proposed that the Council 
complete this Agenda Item and consider continuing remaining Agenda 
Items. 
Council Member Cormack shared visitors' positive comments regarding the 
opening of Foothills Park.  She did not support implementing fees as a way 
to deter visitation; however, she did support implementing fees to pay for 
fencing, bathrooms, and staffing.  The Council needed to refer the matter to 
the PARC as it did not have sufficient data to make decisions.   
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
XX to: 
A. 
Amend PAMC section 22.04.150(k), using an Emergency Ordinance, to 
authorize the City Manager to adjust the attendance limits at Foothills 
Park, not to exceed 750 people; 
B. 
Direct the Parks and Recreation Commission to quickly return to 
Council with previously directed proposal for fees, including annual 
passes;  
C. 
Direct Staff to prepare to implement a fee system by procuring any 
systems required and designing any processes needed; and 
D. 
Direct Staff to continue to work with the town of Los Altos Hills and the 
neighbors of Foothills Park to promote the safety of pedestrians and 
vehicles.  
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
Council Member Kou inquired about Staff's ability to ensure bicyclists did not 
travel on trails within Foothills Park. 
Mr. Anderson advised that Staff capacity was not sufficient for monitoring 
trails.  Park Rangers were allowed to direct bicyclists to leave the park or to 
issue citations when they observed bicyclists on the trails.  Unfortunately, 
bicyclists entered Foothills Park illegally and unobserved through various 
entrances.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Council Member Kou requested ideas for managing the multiple entry points.   
Mr. Anderson indicated Staff capacity was not sufficient to monitor the main 
entrance much less all entrances.  If a docent program was initiated in the 
future, those volunteers could provide assistance.   
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the Office of Transportation's 
involvement in reviewing the traffic issues. 
Mr. Anderson related that Office of Transportation Staff provided some 
suggestions, but more work was needed.   
Council Member Kou asked if Staff planned to engage with residents around 
Foothills Park regarding measures to manage traffic.   
Mr. Anderson stated Staff was receiving complaints and concerns from the 
residents, but more work was needed. 
Council Member Kou requested the history of entry fees for Foothills Park. 
Mr. Anderson reported that the Municipal Fee Schedule set a daily entry fee 
of $2 and an annual pass fee of $25 in 1988.  The fees were removed in 
2001.  The fees were implemented as cost recovery for reconstruction of the 
Boronda Lake dam.   
Council Member Kou expressed disappointment that Foothills Park was 
opened without a plan. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the Park Rangers were counting people or 
vehicles. 
Mr. Anderson replied primarily vehicles. 
Council Member Filseth hoped that a citation for bicyclists utilizing park trails 
was costly enough to get their attention.  During his visits to Foothills Parks, 
he observed the issues other people reported.  He questioned whether the 
vehicle limit needed to be less than 180. 
Council Member Stone supported an Emergency Ordinance setting a cap of 
500 visitors.  The Stay at Home Orders increased attendance at all parks 
and open space, and those were likely to continue for a while.  He supported 
charging fees for bicyclists and pedestrians.  He inquired regarding Staff's 
ability to collect fees for bicyclists and pedestrians. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Mr. Anderson expressed concerns regarding the safety of bicyclists and 
pedestrians queuing among vehicles and the fees driving more bicyclists and 
pedestrians to unmanned entrances.   
Council Member Stone suggested a discounted or no fee for students and fee 
waivers for low-income visitors.  Staff needed to provide regular updates to 
the PARC or Council.   
Vice Mayor Burt noted the severity of issues declined on weekdays after the 
holidays, but weekends were still a problem.  He preferred to set a limit on 
the number of vehicles allowed in the park at any one time, allow Staff some 
discretion to adjust the limit, and implement a daily entry fee on weekends 
only. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member XX to 
adopt an Ordinance to: 
A. 
Direct Staff to impose caps on the number of attendees between 500-
650 people; and 
B. 
Amend the Municipal Fee Schedule to add a weekend entrance fee for 
Foothills Park of $6 per vehicle and a pedestrian and bicycle fee of $3 
each.  
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
Vice Mayor Burt noted high attendance at Arastradero Preserve since open 
space was opened to visitors in May 2020.  Improving the overflow parking 
lot at Arastradero Preserve could draw visitors from Foothills Park to 
Arastradero Preserve.  Signage needed to be installed promptly. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding the busiest days of the week at 
Foothills Park. 
Mr. Anderson responded weekends and holidays.  Attendance on weekdays 
varied but was significantly less than weekends. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to utilize an Emergency Ordinance to limit 
the number of visitors and implement fees.  Foothills Park's revenue and 
expenses needed to be Budget neutral. 
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kou to adopt an Ordinance to: 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
A. 
Amend PAMC Section 22.04.150(k) to authorize the City Manager to 
adjust the attendance limits at Foothills Park, not to exceed 400 
people; 
B. 
Amend the Municipal Fee Schedule to add a $10 per vehicle and a $3 
per person entrance fee for Foothills Park; and 
C. 
Direct the Parks and Recreation Commission and Staff to return to 
Council with considerations for a reservation system, fees, and annual 
passes; and 
D. 
Direct Staff to return with an Emergency Ordinance to authorize the 
City Manager to adjust the attendance limits at Foothills Park, not to 
exceed 400 people. 
Council Member Tanaka indicated the Motion provided a general framework 
until details were determined.   
Council Member Kou inquired whether the Council was allowed to adopt an 
Emergency Ordinance in the current meeting. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that the Council was allowed to amend 
the proposed Ordinance and pass it on first reading and direct Staff to return 
with an Emergency Ordinance.  The Agenda Item was not noticed as an 
Emergency Ordinance. 
Council Member Kou recommended the Council set a low initial cap that 
could be changed with assessment of impacts.   
Mayor DuBois requested clarification of the City Manager's ability to adjust 
the visitor cap. 
Mr. Anderson explained that Staff intended to provide the City Manager with 
the ability to increase or decrease the cap based on observations.  He 
recommended the Council refer further definition of thresholds for 
adjustments to the PARC.   
Mayor DuBois asked about the rationale for drafting an Emergency 
Ordinance. 
Ms. Stump reported that an Emergency Ordinance decreased the visitor cap 
from 750 to 400 immediately upon its adoption.  A standard Ordinance was 
effective 30 days after a second reading. 
Mayor DuBois noted adoption of an Emergency Ordinance required the 
approval of six Council Members.  He proposed Staff conduct limited 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
enforcement of park regulations and manage Foothills Park in a more natural 
state. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change the Motion, Part B to read, “… to add 
an interim $6 per vehicle entrance fee for Foothills Park.”  
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change the Motion, Part A and D to read, “… 
400 people but not to exceed 500 people.” 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change the Motion, Part C to read, “… to return 
to Council with fees, rules, and enforcement policies.” 
Council Member Stone reiterated his desire to waive fees for low-income 
visitors and discount fees for students and seniors.   
Council Member Tanaka preferred the PARC determine a fee schedule given 
the late hour. 
Council Member Kou concurred with directing the PARC to provide a fee 
waiver for low-income visitors. 
Mr. Anderson related that implementing a fee waiver for the daily entry fee 
was going to be difficult.  The PARC was interested in a fee waiver and 
explored some models.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, Part C, “discounts.” 
Council Member Cormack proposed amending the Motion to charge an entry 
fee on weekends only.   
Council Member Tanaka wanted the revenues and expenses to be budget 
neutral. 
Council Member Cormack noted additional staffing was needed if the fee was 
charged on weekdays.   
Mr. Anderson reported collecting a fee on weekdays was not possible at the 
current time due to limited staffing.  Staff recommended the purchase of an 
automated machine to collect entry fees on weekdays.   
Council Member Cormack requested a date on which weekday fees could be 
implemented. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Mr. Anderson replied March 24, 2021. 
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of Part A. 
Ms. Stump explained that the City Manager was allowed to set the cap 
between 400 and 500 people. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether the Council typically referred 
development of enforcement policies to Boards and Commissions. 
Mr. Shikada felt PARC input was appropriate given the nature of the issues. 
Council Member Filseth proposed amending the entry fee to $10 so that staff 
did not have to make change. 
Mr. Anderson supported the proposal to simplify Staff's work. 
Mayor DuBois noted parks in Santa Clara County and San Mateo County 
charged $6. 
Council Member Filseth asked if compliance with the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) was an issue at Foothills Park. 
Mr. Anderson advised that Office of Transportation Staff needed to review 
the number of accessible parking stalls.   
Council Member Filseth proposed banning dogs from Foothills Park at all 
times and supported exploration of a reservation system. 
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council 
Member Tanaka to change the entrance fee from $6 to $10. 
Vice Mayor Burt inquired about including the fees in the Emergency 
Ordinance. 
Ms. Stump did not believe there was a difference for weekdays. 
Vice Mayor Burt recommended the Council address the most important 
issues on an interim basis and defer the remaining issues because of the late 
hour.  There was no process to collect fees on weekdays; therefore, only a 
weekend fee was appropriate on an interim basis.  A fee of $10 was too 
high.  The correct visitor limit was currently unknown.  A limit of 400 visitors 
was likely to deter residents from visiting Foothills Park.   
Council Member Filseth related that a limit of 1,000 visitors was possible. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
Vice Mayor Burt clarified that the City Manager set the limit at 750 visitors.   
AMENDMENT WITHDRAWN BY THE MAKER 
Mr. Anderson requested the Council exempt volunteers from paying the fee 
only on the days they worked in the park.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, Part B, “… with volunteers 
exempted.”  
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change Motion, Part D, to read, “Direct Staff to 
return with an Emergency Ordinance to:  
a. 
Amend PAMC Section 22.04.150(k) to authorize the City Manager to 
adjust the attendance limits at Foothills Park, to 400 people but not to 
exceed 500 people; and 
b. 
Amend the Municipal Fee Schedule to add an interim $6 per vehicle 
entrance fee for Foothills Park, with volunteers exempted.” 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Tanaka moved, 
seconded by Council Member Kou to adopt an Ordinance to: 
A. 
Amend PAMC Section 22.04.150(k) to authorize the City Manager to 
adjust the attendance limits at Foothills Park, 400 people but not to 
exceed 500 people; 
B. 
Amend the Municipal Fee Schedule to add an interim $6 per vehicle 
entrance fee for Foothills Park, with volunteers exempted;  
C. 
Direct the Parks and Recreation Commission and Staff to return to 
Council with considerations for fees, discounts, rules and enforcement 
policies; and 
D. 
Direct Staff to return with an Emergency Ordinance to:  
a. 
Amend PAMC Section 22.04.150(k) to authorize the City 
Manager to adjust the attendance limits at Foothills Park, 400 
people but not to exceed 500 people; and 
b. 
Amend the Municipal Fee Schedule to add an interim $6 per 
vehicle entrance 
fee for Foothills Park, with volunteers 
exempted. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  01/19/2021 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-1 Cormack no 
4. 
Provide Feedback and Direction on the Community & Economic 
Recovery Workplan and Approve Budget Amendments in Various 
Funds. (This item is continued to January 25, 2021). 
7. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of a Temporary Ordinance Amending 
Title 18 (Zoning) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code to Broaden 
Permissible Uses and Raise Thresholds for Conditional Use Permits for 
Some Land Uses Throughout the City. Environmental Review: 
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Exemption 15061(b)(3) 
(FIRST READING: December 14, 2020 PASSED: 7-0) (Continued From 
January 11, 2021). (This item is continued to a future date.) 
5. 
Formation of Working Group and Council Subcommittee for the 2023- 
31 Housing Element Update Process. (This item is continued to a 
future date). 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Kou reported Group 2 of the Santa Clara Valley 
Transportation Authority (VTA) elected Vice Mayor Burt to the VTA Board of 
Directors.  A workshop was scheduled for 9:00 A.M. on Friday.   
Mayor DuBois advised that the League of Cities discussed working with the 
Santa Clara/Santa Cruz Counties Airport Roundtable as its financial 
authority. 
Vice Mayor Burt indicated he was appointed as the Santa Clara County Cities 
Association's representative to the San Francisco Bay Conservation & 
Development Commission (BCDC).   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned in recognition of Martin Luther 
King Jr. at 12:00 A.M. 
