CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 17 
Special Meeting 
March 23, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers at 5:06 P.M. 
Present:  DuBois, Fine 
Participating Remotely:  Cormack, Filseth, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Mayor Fine noted procedures for the Council's first meeting with Council 
Members participating via Zoom videoconference. 
Action Item 
A. 
Update and Discussion of the COVID-19 Health Emergency and the 
City's Response – Verbal Report, No Written Staff Report. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager reported Staff identified key messages of stay 
home, stay connected and be kind to share with the public.  The community 
struggled with sheltering in place, but the strategy was going to save lives.  
The City had transitioned almost 90 percent of their employees to remote work 
and closed almost all facilities to the public.  Staff was exploring signage and 
access limitations for the Baylands and Foothills Park.  Both the Police and Fire 
Departments had revised response protocols in order to reduce the risk of 
exposure for first responders and established isolation procedures.  The 
Emergency Operations Center (EOC) was activated and was utilizing the 
National Incident Management System (NIMS) to expedite decision-making 
and coordination among departments.  The process for reviewing and 
approving the Budget was not going to change but was going to be 
streamlined.  As the financial implications of the current emergency were 
revealed, the City Council and the Finance Committee were going to receive 
updates regarding the Proposed Budget.  The Palo Alto Chinese American 
Community donated 195 masks to the Fire Department.  The City launched 
its community support call center with 29 attendants and five research 
librarians in response to an increasing number of calls to 911.  Utility shutoffs 
had been suspended.  Emergency Services volunteers were assisting with 
outreach.  Staff continued to develop contingency plans for additional 
emergencies.  The City's communications with the public and other agencies 
were two-way.  Staff established ongoing links with the Citizen Corps Council, 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
nonprofits and local businesses.  Ten people had responded to the Downtown 
Streets Team's request for volunteer assistance, which the City had 
distributed.  The City established a system for their essential workers to stay 
in hotels at the City’s expense for the nights before and after their work shifts.  
Staff was working with the County of Santa Clara (County) Office of Education 
to establish pop-up childcare.  The City was doing their best to work and 
comply with the County's and Governor's Orders.  The Palo Alto Art Center 
and Children's Theatre were providing online programming for children.  The 
issuance of citations related to time-restricted parking zones was suspended, 
and citations issued on March 16, 2020 were going to be voided.   
Ken Dueker, Chief Office of Emergency Services advised that Staff's mission 
was to do the most good for the most people as efficiently as possible.  
Hospital resources across the State increased.  The City of Hayward had 
activated a drive-through triage center.  Stanford University activated an 
expanded drive-through testing site later in the week.  Staff was planning for 
second-order contingencies, such as difficulties with cellular networks; plans 
could be found at cityofpaloalto.org/publicsafety. 
Mayor Fine requested the public practice social distancing, increase personal 
hygiene, donate blood and personal protective equipment and cancel 
nonessential travel and medical procedures.  Flexport.org was accepting 
donations to source and deliver medical supplies to the Bay Area.  He 
encouraged residents to be kind and courteous and to support one another.  
The County was increasing the number of Intensive Care Unit (ICU) beds and 
recruiting retired healthcare personnel.  A Federal medical station was opened 
at the Santa Clara County Convention Center.  The County was not releasing 
information regarding hotspots of infection.  Silicon Valley Strong was 
assisting seniors and people with limited mobility to obtain food and food 
deliveries.  Parking personnel were traveling throughout the community on 
behalf of public safety organizations.  Utility rate relief was provided for 
residential and commercial customers.  The California Avenue Farmers Market 
was considered an essential grocery.  Staff was working with the leaders of 
the Farmers Market to implement social distancing practices.  The Citizen 
Corps Council (CCC) was meeting twice per week.  The City and Chamber of 
Commerce were coordinating relief for small businesses and nonprofits.   
Council Member Cormack indicated the County's frequently asked questions 
(FAQ) were the best source of information regarding the Shelter-In-Place 
order, and the FAQs were updated frequently.  The City's webpage was 
updated constantly, and the daily newsletter contained accurate information.  
Staff was investigating restrictions on religious services.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois related that Palo Alto Unified School District (PAUSD) began 
Phase 2 of flexible learning for students that day.  Following Spring Break, 
hopefully a solution for distance learning was going to be in place.  The Parent 
Teacher Association (PTA) was delivering approximately 120 meals per day to 
Buena Vista.  The faith community was working to establish a chain of 
communication to distribute food and identify families in crisis.  He was not 
aware of a strong need for childcare but planned for the need to occur.  He 
encouraged citizens to support local businesses.   
Council Member Filseth stated most businesses with which he had spoken 
anticipated a few weeks of cushion and had significant concerns if the 
emergency continued for weeks or months.  Most retail businesses closed but 
were conducting business online or through inquiry.  Businesses did not seem 
to expect evictions because most landlords probably were not going evict good 
tenants, but everyone appreciated some kind of rent relief.  Professional firms 
Downtown were okay.  Restaurants with significant takeout business were 
continuing to operate.  Small businesses with only a few employees perhaps 
were able to weather the emergency better than other businesses.  He said 
some of the larger businesses in Stanford Research Park may have business 
disruption insurance coverage that could assist them.  Stanford Research Park 
requested the Council postpone consideration of a Business Tax.  By and large, 
businesses were not interested in Small Business Administration (SBA) loans 
because it had to be repaid.   
Council Member Kniss advised that the County could not release specific 
information because of Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) requirements.  Many people were inquiring about testing for the 
Coronavirus.  However, a person needed to have symptoms and a doctor's 
order to be tested.  People were reinforcing social distancing practices while 
out and about.  Stanford University's Everyday COVID Report was very helpful.   
Council Member Kou indicated Emergency Services volunteers were sharing 
communications with the community.  A psychologist was preparing a list of 
volunteer psychologists to take calls from those in stress.  Magical Bridge was 
providing concerts for children from noon to 1:00 P.M.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to include public comment via Zoom 
videoconferencing during Council meetings.  He questioned whether closing 
some public facilities, such as tennis courts, was appropriate.  Some people 
shared their efforts with him to contact the Utilities Department about an 
overflowing sewer.  He encouraged the community to join the Slack group for 
two-way communications with the City and Council.  Many businesses 
continued to pay their employees, but they were only able to do so for a 
limited time.  The Council needed to think about a Stimulus Plan for businesses 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
and reprioritizing expenditures.  He requested the amounts that Sales Tax and 
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) revenues had decreased.   
Mayor Fine asked if restaurants were giving or were allowed to give their food 
inventory to the public. 
Mr. Shikada was not aware of such.   
Mr. Dueker related that he had heard a few news stories about restaurants 
converting to grocery stores.  Some restaurants sold their food inventory.   
Mayor Fine inquired regarding a decision to close City open space preserves. 
Mr. Shikada clarified that the Governor closed parking lots at parks, not the 
parks, to limit access.  If closing parking lots did not manage the number of 
people, then closure was the next step if Staff did not develop another 
strategy. 
Mayor Fine asked if water restrictions could be imposed over the next few 
months. 
Council Member Cormack reported the Bay Area Water Supply and 
Conservation Agency (BAWSCA) had received an update on water supplies 
that afternoon.  System storage was high at 84 percent.  The demand for 
water from the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC) was down.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if Staff was thinking about services that could be 
provided in a metered manner. 
Mr. Shikada advised that the District Attorney's Office had indicated tennis 
was not a permissible activity.   
Kristen O’Kane, Community Services Director related that Staff was focusing 
on virtual programming to avoid gatherings of people.  Tennis and pickleball 
courts were considered gathering spaces.  Social distancing was difficult to 
maintain in parks.   
Council Member Kou requested the City Manager elaborate regarding the 
tracking of networks. 
Mr. Shikada reported Mr. Dueker and he had tracked outages or slowdowns in 
wireless networks earlier in the day.  Distance learning and telework was going 
to be impacted by a disruption in wireless networks. 
Mr. Dueker reiterated that the water supply was more than adequate for 
demands. 
 
However, 
wildfire 
season 
was 
going 
to 
begin 
soon.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
Telecommunications impacts were correlated with increased distance learning 
and telework. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding a plan for homeless individuals. 
Mr. Shikada advised that the Office of Human Services was coordinating and 
monitoring accommodations for the homeless.   
Council Member Kou requested the nonprofit agencies with which the Office 
of Human Services was working. 
Mr. Shikada stated the Santa Clara County Executive Officer. 
Council Member Kou inquired about determining the needs and potential 
illness of homeless people. 
Mr. Shikada indicated the Office of Human Services kept in touch with the 
Opportunity Center, the Downtown Streets Team and other organizations that 
provided direct services. 
Ms. O’Kane clarified that Staff was meeting biweekly with nonprofit service 
providers to determine needs and additional services and to coordinate 
services. 
Council Member Kou inquired about the provisions of the Governor's Order 
released the previous day. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney stated it did not list additional restrictions 
pertaining to City operations.   
Council Member Kou asked if a discussion of Executive Orders should be 
included in future Agendas. 
Ms. Stump explained that recent Executive Orders provided cities with 
additional authority or flexibility and suspended or extended some statutes of 
limitation.  Given the volume of materials, Staff was focusing on provisions 
that affected the City.   
Mr. Dueker reported Staff was monitoring legislative actions.  The prior day's 
Executive Orders did not apply directly to City operations.   
Council Member Filseth noted San Mateo County parks were open, but 
restrooms and picnic areas were closed.  Access to the parks was severely 
limited over the weekend. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
Council Member Kniss requested Staff comment on the use of the Police 
Department to disperse gatherings. 
Robert Jonsen, Police Chief reported the Police Department was responding to 
some complaints and using education to enforce social distancing.  If the 
public did not practice social distancing, the Police Department may have to 
enforce requirements. 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Action Item 
1. 
Consideration of Analysis, Public Outreach, and Refined Polling and 
Further Direction on a Potential Local Business Tax Ballot Measure for 
2020 Election and Potential Changes to the Business Registry and 
Business Improvement District Programs. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager advised that a base Report provided analysis of next 
steps related to development of a Business Tax, and an At-Places Memo 
recommended Staff discontinue work on a local tax measure for the 
November, 2020 election, focus on revisions to the Business Registry and 
present the Council with a new schedule for grade separation.   
Herb Borock supported the recommendation to discontinue work on the ballot 
measure and suggested a delay in work on grade separation.  A bill in the 
Legislature proposed to reallocate $8 billion from High Speed Rail to Southern 
California rail.  Similarly, funding for High Speed Rail was able to be 
reallocated to Northern California grade separation in the future. 
Council Member Tanaka felt the Staff recommendation was appropriate given 
the anticipated economic collapse.   
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to: 
A. 
In response to the current public health emergency, discontinue work 
on the development of a local business tax measure for the November 
2020 election; 
B. 
Focus Staff work over the coming year on revisions to the City’s existing 
Business Registry Certificate Program with the specific goals of:  
i. 
Streamlining the process to register;  
ii. 
Ensuring 
all 
businesses 
are 
registered, 
improving 
the 
completeness of the registry and reliability of the data; and  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
C. 
Direct Staff to return with a Railroad Grade Separation workplan that 
extends the target date for selection of preferred alternatives. 
Council Member Tanaka believed returning the economy to stability was 
critical.  The City needed to help the economy recover.   
Council Member Kniss supported the Motion because of the impacts of the 
public health emergency on local businesses and City revenues and the 
impacts a Business Tax were going to have on local businesses.  She hoped 
Staff was able to prepare and present a revised workplan for grade separation.   
Council Member Tanaka proposed waiving the Business Registration Fee. 
Council Member Kniss requested Staff comment on waiving the Business 
Registration Fee. 
Mr. Shikada reported the fee of roughly $50 defrayed some costs of the 
Business Registry but did not generate revenue.  If the Council wished to 
waive the fee, they needed to provide a time period for the waiver.   
Kiely Nose, Administrative Services Director clarified that businesses were 
currently paying their fees, and Staff was considering extending the deadline 
due to the public health emergency. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “Consider waiving the 
business registration fee.” (New Part B. iii) 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “Direct Staff to look at how 
we can stimulate/support the businesses in Palo Alto”. (New Part D) 
Council Member Kou objected to the process by which this item was brought 
to the Council and urged Staff to follow the established process. 
Mr. Shikada reported the City Manager's Office released notice of the Staff 
recommendation with the late Packet through all communication channels, but 
the notice did not presume a Council decision on the item. 
Council Member Filseth noted the anticipation of significant City expenses in 
the next few years and asked if Staff anticipated any delay in Caltrain's 
Electrification Project. 
Mr. Shikada replied no.  Caltrain's contractor continued work because public 
works were exempt from the orders. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
Council Member Filseth believed the Council should keep an eye on tax 
revenues and ways to finance grade separation.  He inquired whether delaying 
a potential Business Tax to 2022 meant the work already performed was going 
to have to be repeated. 
Mr. Shikada indicated the work did not need to be repeated.  A delay in the 
ballot measure and revision of the Business Registry provided a better sense 
of the composition of local businesses.  Some of the assumptions in the 
analysis was possibly more accurate with an improved Business Registry.   
Council Member Filseth related that Matrix Consulting's employment data 
appeared to be the type of data that the Business Registry needed to provide. 
Mr. Shikada concurred. 
Council Member Filseth remarked that the Motion was logical, but a larger 
Business Tax was going to be needed in a few years to fund grade separation.   
Vice Mayor DuBois supported the Motion and said, while he supported a 
Business Tax, the timing was not right.  The Business Registry needed 
attention, including data integrity checks.  Independent of a Business Tax, the 
Council needed to select preferred alternatives for grade separation.  He 
inquired whether Staff was going to make a recommendation regarding 
waiving the Business Registration Fee and for what time period.   
Council Member Tanaka answered yes. 
Vice Mayor DuBois indicated he could agree to waiving the fee for a year and 
proposed a Council discussion of programs to support local businesses during 
one of the next two meetings.   
Council Member Tanaka agreed with the proposal. 
Mr. Shikada advised that Staff were not going to have an opportunity to 
analyze programs prior to the next meeting on April 6, 2020.  On April 6, 
2020, the Council was able to brainstorm and identify areas on which Staff 
needed to focus.  However, the impacts of the emergency were probably not 
any clearer.  In addition, State and Federal assistance packages were being 
prepared. 
Vice Mayor DuBois stated in the next week or two there could be emergency 
ordinances for businesses, particularly for small retailers.  A Council discussion 
of programs was possibly time sensitive.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
Mayor Fine committed to working with the City Manager to schedule a 
discussion.  Input from the Chamber of Commerce and businesses were 
valuable for a discussion.   
Council Member Cormack supported the Motion because the economic 
situation changed drastically in the past few weeks.  If a Business Tax measure 
was placed on the 2020 ballot and passed, businesses were not going to pay 
the tax for 21 months or more.  She concurred with Council Member Filseth's 
remarks as the Business Tax was about transportation and grade separation, 
in her opinion.  Given that people may not commute or may commute in new 
ways, the need for revenue and grade separation was possibly going to 
change.  She expressed concern about the term "stimulate" in Part D because 
it suggested fiscal policy.  She requested Council Member Tanaka remove 
"stimulate" from Part D. 
Council Member Tanaka clarified that Staff would present feasible scenarios 
for Council consideration.   
Mayor Fine related that the change was reasonable.  He said "stimulate" could 
imply economic stimulus, policy stimulus or communications.  If Staff 
determined investments in local businesses were necessary, the Council was 
able to consider them. 
Council Member Kniss believed a stimulus did not have to be monetary.  The 
Cities Association was able to provide information about actions taken in other 
cities.   
Council Member Filseth commented that "stimulate" suggested a debt-
financed Keynesian stimulus, which was unrealistic for a city.  Therefore, 
retaining "Stimulate" in the Motion was not going to cause harm.   
Council Member Cormack did not want the business community to think the 
City would make fiscal policy investments in businesses.   
Mayor Fine concurred that the current time was not appropriate to consider a 
Business Tax.  People were encouraged to remain at home rather than attend 
Council meetings, which was an issue for a tax measure.  Staff needed to 
review the audit of the Business Registry.   
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Tanaka moved, 
seconded by Council Member Kniss to: 
A. 
In response to the current public health emergency, discontinue work 
on the development of a local business tax measure for the November 
2020 election;  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
B. 
Focus Staff work over the coming year on revisions to the city’s existing 
business registry certificate program with the specific goals of:  
i. 
Streamlining the process to register;  
ii. 
Ensuring 
all 
businesses 
are 
registered, 
improving 
the 
completeness of the registry and reliability of the data;  
iii. 
Consider waiving the business registration fee;  
C. 
Direct Staff to return with a Railroad Grade Separation workplan that 
extends the target date for selection of preferred alternatives; and 
D. 
Direct Staff to look at how we can stimulate/support the businesses in 
Palo Alto. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
Oral Communications 
None. 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Tanaka registered no votes on Agenda Item Numbers 2, 5, 
and 5A. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to approve 
Agenda Item Numbers 2-5A. 
2. 
Approval of Contract Number C20176367 With Serco, Inc. for Three 
Years in an Amount Not-to-Exceed $2,322,285 for Residential 
Preferential Parking (RPP) Enforcement Services. 
3. 
Approval of Contract Number C20178071 With Oracle America, Inc. for 
Two-year Term for Software Program Technical Support Services in the 
Amount of $262,986; and Authorize the City Manager to Authorize and 
Execute a Contract Amendment for up to a 10 Percent Contingency or 
in an Amount Not-to-Exceed $26,298 in the Event Additional Services 
are Required, for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $289,284. 
4. 
Adoption of a Record of Land Use Action Approving a Change to the 
Local Historic Resources Inventory Classification for 526 Waverley 
Street from a Category 3 (Contributing Building) to a Category 2 (Major 
Building) Historic Resource. The Historic Resources Board Recommends 
Adoption of the Record of Land Use Action; Approval of This Historic 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
Designation is Exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act 
(CEQA) in Accordance with Section 15301 of the CEQA Guidelines. 
5. 
Approval of a $360,000 Net Zero Budget Amendment in the General 
Fund for the Planning & Development Services Department’s Cost 
Recovery Program for Private Development Studies.  
5A.  Direction to Staff on Preparation of the Fiscal Year 2021 Proposed 
Operating and Capital Budgets. 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 2, 5, 5A:  6-1 Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 3, 4:  7-0 
Council Member Tanaka preferred to use the $2.3 million proposed in Agenda 
Item Number 2 to aid the community as the City Manager had previously 
stated parking restrictions were not being enforced.  Agenda Item Number 5 
assumed an increase in development fees, which probably was not going occur 
with the current economic downturn.  Regarding Agenda Item Number 5A, he 
concurred with a streamlined Budget process.  However, using the Fiscal Year 
(FY) 2020 Budget as the basis for the FY 2021 Budget was not logical in the 
current economic climate. 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported the term of the Serco contract in Agenda 
Item Number 2 was three years, and the current contract was going to expire 
at the end of the month.  Without the contract, parking enforcement was not 
going to resume at the end of the emergency.  Regarding Agenda Item 
Number 5, if there were no revenues, there were going to be no expenditures.  
Agenda Item Number 5A reflected that the document would be a placeholder 
Budget and would not preclude any policy actions.   
Action Items 
6. 
Review of the 2020 Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) 
Update Process and Accept the 2020-2021 Sustainability Work Plan 
(STAFF REQUESTS THIS ITEM BE CONTINUED TO APRIL 13, 
2020). 
7. 
Acceptance of the GreenWaste of Palo Alto Environmental Report; 
Authorization to Negotiate and Execute an Amendment to GreenWaste 
Contract Number C09124501 to Increase Compensation by up to 
$950,000 to Process Mixed Paper Within the United States; and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
Approval of a Budget Amendment in the Refuse Fund (STAFF 
REQUESTS THIS ITEM BE CONTINUED TO AN UNKNOWN DATE). 
8. 
Adoption of a Regular Ordinance and Urgency Ordinance 5492 Entitled, 
“Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Establishing a 
Temporary Moratorium on Residential Tenant Evictions for Nonpayment 
of Rent Related to the COVID-19 State of Emergency;” and Discussion 
and Direction on Extending the Evictions Moratorium to Commercial 
Tenants. 
Council Member Kniss was not going to participate in this Agenda Item due to 
ownership of rental property.  
Molly Stump, City Attorney reported the end date in the draft Ordinance was 
tied to the County of Santa Clara's (County) declaration of a local public health 
emergency.  Staff recommended tying the end date to the Council's 
Proclamation of a local emergency.  The Proposed Ordinances prohibited 
landlords from assessing late fees to tenants who sought protections provided 
by the Proposed Ordinances.  Staff recommended changing the language to 
prohibit landlords from charging or collecting "interest, a late fee or a penalty."   
Council Member Cormack asked if the prohibition language was contained in 
Section 6 of the Proposed Ordinance. 
Ms. Stump responded yes, Section 6, Paragraph A.  The end date appeared in 
Section 6, Paragraph A, and Section 10. 
Council Member Kou asked if the Ordinance expired on the date the 
emergency was lifted. 
Ms. Stump explained that the Proposed Ordinance was set to expire 121 days 
after the City concluded their local emergency.  The Council was able to extend 
the expiration date as needed in the future.   
Council Member Kou requested clarification of voting on a Motion. 
Ms. Stump advised that the Proposed Urgency Ordinance required five 
affirmative votes for adoption and, if adopted, took effect immediately.  The 
regular Ordinance required four affirmative votes for adoption and became 
effective 31 days following a second reading.   
Ms. Stump indicated on April 16, 2020, the Governor issued an Executive 
Order, which allowed local governments to provide some eviction protections 
for both residential and commercial tenants affected by COVID-19 related 
income loss.  The State Legislature was considering some statewide 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
protections, but the Legislature was in recess until April 13, 2020.  Bills were 
not introduced, and the provisions of future legislation were unknown.  The 
Governor's Office was monitoring local ordinances for rental protections and 
were expected to issue stronger protections during the upcoming week.  A few 
cities expanded their protections to include commercial tenants, but language 
for those protections was not available.  The Federal Government took action 
to prohibit foreclosures.  Under the City's Ordinances, the tenant must provide 
written notice and supporting documentation to the landlord.  The tenant was 
to remain responsible for unpaid rents unless the landlord waived any unpaid 
rents.  The tenant needed to pay all unpaid rents on or before 120 days after 
the end of the local emergency.  The tenant and landlord were able to agree 
to another arrangement for payment of unpaid rents.  The Council was able 
to change the 120-day period in the future.  If the Council wished to extend 
protections to commercial tenants, they needed to provide some high-level 
policy direction to Staff.   
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois 
to: 
A. 
Adopt the Urgency Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo Alto 
Relating to a Temporary Moratorium on Residential Evictions for 
Nonpayment of Rent During the COVID-19 State of Emergency and 
Declaring the Ordinance to be an Emergency Measure to Take Effect 
Immediately Upon Adoption,  
B. 
Adopt the Ordinance Relating to a Temporary Moratorium on Residential 
Evictions for Nonpayment of Rent During the COVID-19 State of 
Emergency, and  
C. 
Direct Staff to bring forward a similar moratorium to protect small 
businesses and nonprofit organizations. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to be proactive in assisting renters.  The 
language allowing the City Manager to correct inconsistencies with State and 
Federal laws was appreciated.  She expressed concern about protections for 
landlords whose only income was rent collection.   
Vice Mayor DuBois believed the 120-day time period needed to be extended 
if the emergency lasted for a few months.  Homeowners had to contact their 
mortgage lenders regarding Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie 
Mae) mortgage forbearance.  He inquired regarding the basis for 20 
employees in Part C. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
Council Member Cormack answered that she based the number on Agenda 
Item Number 1 and information on Packet Page 7.  She was agreeable to 
increasing the number of employees to 50. 
Vice Mayor DuBois proposed Part C does not contain a number.  Instead, he 
requested Staff include Part C with Part D of the Motion for Agenda Item 
Number 1. 
Council Member Cormack agreed. 
Council Member Filseth felt the urgency was probably higher for residential 
tenants than commercial tenants.  He expressed concern that the broad 
definition of documentation and the landlord's burden to prove the 
documentation was false could result in a six-month rent holiday.   
Ms. Stump indicated Staff had not had time to conduct extensive outreach to 
stakeholders.  The Proposed Ordinances did not relieve tenants of the 
obligation to pay rent.  Unpaid rent had to be paid within 120 days following 
the City's lifting of the emergency Proclamation.  During the repayment 
period, a tenant was possibly unable to pay both regular monthly rent and 
unpaid rent.   
Council Member Filseth asked if the Council could extend the repayment 
period. 
Ms. Stump responded yes, unless the State enacted protections that 
preempted local protections. 
Council Member Kou commented that the protections provided tenants with 
some stability and appreciated the deletion of the number of employees from 
the Motion.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if the mortgage forbearance applied to all 
mortgage holders or to mortgages held by Fannie Mae only.   
Vice Mayor DuBois clarified that, according to a Fannie Mae representative, 
lenders that worked with Fannie Mae had to abide by Fannie Mae's 
forbearance.  Most lenders were associated with Fannie Mae.   
Council Member Tanaka noted most landlords were not wealthy, and their 
properties were mortgaged.  He expressed worry for landlords who might not 
receive any rental income to pay their mortgages and/or other monthly 
expenses.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
Ms. Stump stated there would be tradeoffs.  When the Proposed Ordinance 
returned on April 6, 2020 for a second reading, Staff was able to have more 
information regarding Fannie Mae's mortgage forbearance. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested the Ordinances exclude landlords with only 
one or two rental units, no other income, or mortgages on rental properties. 
Ms. Stump reiterated that the Proposed Ordinances did not relieve tenants of 
the obligation to pay rents.  Any tenant that was able to pay all or some of 
their monthly rent needed to do so.  The tradeoffs were policy questions for 
the Council.  The Council was able to delay action to consider additional 
aspects.  She did not recommend the Council make a distinction based on the 
structure or size of the landlord's business; Staff needed to analyze those 
distinctions.   
Council Member Tanaka proposed a Subpart D to consider protections for 
smalltime landlords. 
Council Member Cormack did not accept the proposal because the tenants of 
smalltime landlords did not have the protections intended for all tenants.  She 
inquired whether Staff was aware of such a precedent and whether the level 
of detail was able to be managed. 
Ms. Stump answered not for any ordinance enacted for the public health 
emergency.  She needed to research whether such a distinction was 
appropriate. 
Council Member Cormack shared Council Member Tanaka's concern, but the 
Council's task was to protect tenants with few or no funds for an emergency. 
Ms. Stump advised that the Governor's first justification for allowing cities to 
adopt protections was based on health.  The current environment impacted 
both tenants and landlords, but the paramount concern was the critical health 
issue of keeping people housed.   
Vice Mayor DuBois felt it was a health and safety issue and concurred with 
Council Member Cormack's and Ms. Stump's remarks.  Fannie Mae's 
forbearance appeared to be broadly available for multifamily and single-family 
residences occupied by the owner or others.   
Council Member Tanaka asked how the Council would ensure small landlords 
were not severely impacted by the Proposed Ordinances. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
Mayor Fine reiterated the public health concern of tenants becoming 
unhoused.  Public health and safety were more important than economic 
interests.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether evictions were going to occur 
following the repayment period. 
Ms. Stump replied yes.  If a tenant had not paid all unpaid rents at the end of 
the repayment period, he was eligible for eviction. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if State protections preempted local 
protections. 
Ms. Stump indicated they could, depending on the language of the provisions. 
Council Member Tanaka felt the Council was attempting to do the right thing 
and encouraged small landlords to provide feedback.   
Mayor Fine inquired whether the Proposed Ordinances covered no-fault 
evictions. 
Ms. Stump advised that they did not.  Staff wanted to continue to explore 
broader protections and were able to return with minor amendments for the 
second reading of the regular Ordinance in April, 2020. 
Mayor Fine asked if the tenant had to demonstrate loss of income due to 
COVID-19. 
Ms. Stump answered yes.  The Proposed Ordinances did not cover 
nonpayment of rents for other reasons.   
Mayor Fine related that he had heard from homeowners supporting adoption 
of the Proposed Ordinances but not from any tenant that was covered by the 
Proposed Ordinances.   
MOTION PASSED:  6-0 Kniss recused 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Filseth announced the following day was Takeout Food Day 
(Tuesday’s) and encouraged the community to support local restaurants. 
Council Member Kou noted Magical Bridge was providing afternoon concerts 
via Facebook.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/23/2020 
Council Member Tanaka advised that he was continuing to hold office hours 
via Zoom and encouraged small landlords and businesses to contact him.   
Mayor Fine encouraged residents to practice social distancing while outdoors. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 7:56 P.M. 
