CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 20 
Special Meeting 
 
June 16, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date via Virtual 
Teleconference at 5:03 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss,  Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Oral Communications 
 
Jeremy Erman proclaimed that City Council (Council) exercised no effort 
over Staff regarding the Cubberley Lease and was frustrated that Council did 
not push back on Staff’s recommendations or Staff’s actions. 
Jonathan Erman emphasized that the School Board and Council were not 
happy regarding the Cubberley Lease but were given no other choice by 
Staff but to sign it.  
Action Items 
A. 
Adoption of Amendments to the City of Palo Alto Tobacco Retailer 
Permit Ordinance (Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter 4.64) to Further 
Restrict Electronic Cigarette Products and Flavored Tobacco Products 
(CONTINUED FROM JUNE 8, 2020). 
Lori Khoury stated that the new Tobacco Ordinance would decimate small 
businesses.  She requested that an exemption be instilled in the Ordinance 
that grandfathered in businesses that sold flavored tobacco.  
Naoko Fujii advised the City Council (Council) to adopt the Ordinance 
without exceptions.  She believed only a complete ban would reduce access 
for teenagers.  
Rachel Mesia reported that new evidence linked cigarette smoke and nicotine 
to H2 receptors which increased the binding sites for the Coronavirus 
(COVID-19).  For this reason, she supported the proposed Ordinance.  
Peter Rosenthal mentioned that Mac’s Smoke shop is one of the oldest retail 
establishments in Palo Alto (City) and is the only store that sells the New 
York Times paper.  He supported Mac’s Smoke Shop statement to 
discontinue selling vaping products but sell flavored tobacco.  He did not 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
support the adoption of the Ordinance and requested that exceptions be put 
in place for flavored tobacco. 
Erin McGauley Hebard urged the Council to adopt the Ordinance without 
exceptions.  She mourned the loss of long-time businesses like Mac’s Smoke 
Shop but wanted to see the youth of the City protected.  
Raw Smoke Shop requested that the Santa Clara County Ordinance clarify 
that the Ordinance applies to unincorporated areas.  He disclosed that 
flavoring and flavored tobacco are roughly 80 percent of all smoke shop’s 
business and by banning it, those shops would be put out of business. 
Nitya Marimuthu announced that she was a member of the Stanford Tobacco 
Prevention Advisory Board and that the Council should adopt the Ordinance 
with no exemptions.  
Blythe Young asked the Council to pass a comprehensive flavored tobacco 
policy.  Adult only exemptions were not the best practices, they were hard to 
enforce, and they did not work. She wanted to see public health put first. 
Alan Eng remarked that Council should adopt the Vape Shop Ban without 
exemptions.  He believed closing vape shops would bring better and more 
family-friendly businesses to the City.  
Rebecca Eisenberg supported the proposed Vape Shop Ban.  If restrictions 
were relaxed, Palo Alto was going to become the destination of youth looking 
for vaping and tobacco products.  
Patricia McDaniel encouraged the Council to adopt the proposed Ordinance 
with no exemptions.  Regarding the concerns about smoke shops going out 
of business, they were already declining in sales due to declining tobacco 
use in the State.  
Bonnie Halper-Felsher had been studying tobacco use in youth for over 25 
years and urged the City to adopt the Santa Clara County Department of 
Health Tobacco Permit Ordinance without exemptions.  If it was not passed, 
teenagers were going to continue to buy products within the City without 
having their IDs checked.  
Erwin Morton reported that the Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) Council 
was working for over a year on a Resolution regarding vaping and it was 
voted for adoption by 99 percent at the Annual Statewide Convention. He 
asked that Council protect children and adopt the Ordinance without 
exemptions.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
Roni Selig articulated three reasons why the Ordinance should be passed;  
flavors hooked kids, flavors masked tobacco-related risks, and flavors did 
not help adults quit smoking.   
Jen Grand-Lejano affirmed that Council adopt the policy as written without 
any exemptions.  She did not believe the Ordinance would cause businesses 
to close.  
Eileen Kim encouraged Council to adopt a strong Ordinance that mirrored 
the Santa Clara County Ordinance without exemptions.  
Jade Chao was the president of Palo Alto Council PTAs and reported that the 
community was suffering in terms of teen tobacco addiction.  The City 
needed to take a stand in protecting youth.  
Jessie Singh owned a smoke shop in the City for over 10 years and had a 
clean record regarding tobacco laws.  He did not understand why the City 
would adopt an Ordinance that would shut down his business.  He argued 
that flavored alcohol was also addictive for teens. 
Annie Tegen testified in strong support of the Ordinance without exemptions 
to protect public health.  
Amaya Wooding explained that indoor use of flavored and unflavored hookah 
was banned at the National level across much of the middle east. Flavored 
hookah needed to be banned from the City.  
David Zoumut thought that kids were the parent’s responsibility and adults 
should not be punished because kids were abusing the products.  He noted 
that many people smoked hookahs because it was part of their culture.  
Mayor Fine reiterated that at a prior Council meeting the Council voted 4-3 
but several Council Members pulled the item for further review.  
Council Member Kou interjected that there were more public speakers and 
Mayor Fine did not mention a limit on public speakers. 
Mayor Fine clarified that it was mentioned who the final speaker would be. 
Council Member Kniss recognized that vaping was a City-wide problem and 
did not see flavored tobacco rising to that same level of concern as vaping.  
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to 
direct Staff to create an Ordinance with the following: 
A. 
A complete ban on vaping; 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
B. 
To exempt adult-only stores to sell flavored tobacco products including 
cigar pipe, chewing, and paper cigarettes; and 
C. 
To exempt the onsite use of flavored tobacco products for currently 
permitted businesses. 
Council Member Kniss visited Mac’s Smoke Shop and she left there feeling 
confident that they checked IDs very carefully.  Vaping was able to be 
controlled easier than flavored tobacco.  
Vice Mayor DuBois clarified that there was majority support for a vaping ban, 
Mac’s Smoke Shop supported a vaping ban, and this discussion was about 
vaping products.  He believed that adults should be able to purchase tobacco 
products.  
Molly Stump, City Attorney requested that the Council revise the Motion.  
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change Motion, Part A to read, “…complete ban 
on the sale of vaping products”. 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Kniss moved, 
seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to direct Staff to create an Ordinance with 
the following: 
A. 
A complete ban on the sale of vaping products; 
B. 
To exempt adult-only stores to sell flavored tobacco products including 
cigar, pipes, chewing, and paper cigarettes; and 
C. 
To exempt the onsite use of flavored tobacco products for currently 
permitted businesses. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed with Council Member Kou that more public 
speakers should be allowed to speak.  
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by 
Council Member Cormack to adopt amendments to the City of Palo Alto 
Tobacco Retailer Permit Ordinance (Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter 4.64) 
to further restrict electronic cigarette products and flavored tobacco 
products. 
Council Member Cormack announced that Council has not discussed flavored 
tobacco.  Flavored tobacco was not consistent with a healthy City.  Adults 
had the right to buy tobacco products, but they should be able to buy them 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
in the City.  She referenced Annie Tegan’s letter which stated menthol was a 
popular flavor among youth.  
Mayor Fine reopened the public comment period. 
Tricia Barr requested that Council adopt the Ordinance as written to prohibit 
the sale of flavored tobacco and e-cigarettes.  This was about putting public 
health and youth first.  
Carol B. was in favor of adopting the same language that was in the Santa 
Clara Council Ordinance, without exceptions or exemptions.  
Xander Koo believed that tobacco products should be strongly regulated, but 
he wished to understand what was meant by adult only stores and whether 
that encompassed other smoke shops in the City.  He suggested a phase-out 
plan be implemented so that stores would not be put out of business. 
Grace Mah reminded the Council about a study that was done by the County 
Health Department.  The study reported that the acquisition of e-cigarettes 
and e-liquids among teens was bought, 32 percent from someone else; 27 
percent from the store themselves; and 14 percent from the internet.  She 
supported a complete ban of flavored tobacco, no exceptions.  
Lama Rimawi emphasized that smoke shops located close to schools were 
associated with tobacco use initiation and sustained tobacco use among 
adolescents.  
James Hindery disclosed that he grew up in Palo Alto and that he had started 
using nicotine products at 14 years old.  He completely supported the ban on 
flavored vaping and phasing out tobacco sales completely within the City.  
He concluded that alcohol was equally as dangerous.  
Brian Davis was in favor of ending the sale of all flavored tobacco products 
and e-cigarette devices with no exemptions.  He explained that hookah was 
popular in college towns and that hookah was more addictive than 
cigarettes.  
Vanessa Marvin stated her disappointment in the Council regarding the 
exemptions that the Council was considering.  
Karin Felsher strongly supported the complete restriction of flavored tobacco 
products, including in all retail locations.  She noted that the flavor mint was 
very popular among her friends and that it was easy to walk into a smoke 
shop and obtain products as a teen.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
Bob Gordon reiterated that Ms. Felsher’s comments were from someone who 
witnessed youth obtaining products from smoke shops illegally.  He listed 
several health concerns and issues that were associated with hookah 
smoking.  
Karina foresaw youth turning to black market sales and alcohol to cope with 
the ban of flavored products.  She wanted to see a ban on alcohol if there 
was to be a ban on flavored tobacco products. 
Council Member Kou repeated that enforcement was a nightmare, youth 
needed to have a healthy pathway as they grew up, and vaping was 
targeting younger ages.  She supported the Substitute Motion.  
Mayor Fine agreed with Vice Mayor DuBois’s previous comments.  He 
expressed concern around long time businesses being shut down and 
believed that adults should be able to buy products  
SUBSTITUTE MOTION PASSED:  4-3 DuBois, Fine, Kniss no 
Council took a break at 6:35 P.M. and returned at 6:43 P.M. 
1. 
Direct Staff to Continue With the 2020 Sustainability and Climate 
Action Plan (S/CAP) Update and Evaluate the 2020 S/CAP Potential 
Goals and Key Actions (CONTINUED FROM JUNE 8, 2020). 
Mayor Fine reminded the City Council (Council) as well as the public that 
sustainability and climate change was one of the Council’s priorities. 
Brad Eggleston, Director of Public Works shared that on April 13, 2020, the 
Council had a Study Session to review the Sustainability and Climate Action 
Plan (S/CAP) update process.  At the Study Session, the public as well as 
Council Members expressed interest in making sure that Palo Alto (City) had 
proposed key actions that were robust enough that the City was able to 
achieve the 80 percent by 2030 Carbon Reduction Goal.  
Christine Luong, Public Works Management Analyst remarked that the 
presentation was focused on high impact goals and key actions related to 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions and reductions.  Energy, Mobility and 
Electric Vehicles were three components within the S/CAP that made a large 
impact when it came to GHG emissions.  The Utilities Advisory Commission 
(UAC) reviewed the key actions for GHG emission reduction on May 20, 
2020.   All UAC Commissioners supported the continuation of the Carbon 
Neutral Gas Program.  The main sources of GHG emissions were natural gas 
consumption in buildings and from gasoline and diesel vehicles.  Carbon 
offsets were being purchased in an amount equal to the GHG emissions, but 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
to reach the 2030 goal the City needed 300,000 metric tons (MT) of carbon 
dioxide equivalent reductions.  Both the Energy Goal and the Mobility Goal 
were to reduce transportation GHG emissions by 80 percent by 2023.  Areas 
with the highest potential of reducing GHG emissions included electrifying 
most residential buildings, significantly reduce fossil fuel use in large 
commercial buildings, significantly reduce Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT), and 
electrify the majority of remaining vehicle trips.  Once Council gave direction 
to Staff, AECOM was allowed to estimate the GHG reduction potentials, 
costs, and sustainability co-benefits.  Staff planned to use AECOM’s analysis 
to formulate options and funding that could be used to reach the 80 percent 
by 2030 goal. For Energy, Staff proposed 18 key actions, for Mobility Staff 
proposed 11 key actions, and for Electric Vehicles Staff proposed 15 key 
actions.  Some key actions required legal review, voter approval, policy or 
ordinance changes and code changes.  Staff’s recommended Motion was for 
Council direct Staff to continue to work on the 2020 S/CAP updates.  
Dan Adams requested that the S/CAP state that the people of the City are 
fully committed to a sustainable future.  
Don Jackson urged the Council to read his letter regarding the proposal and 
suggestions regarding updated S/CAP goals.  He urged Council to educate all 
residents about the need to reduce natural gas consumption.   
Sandra Slater supported Mr. Jackson’s comments and encouraged the 
Council to make the programs that AECOM studies as robust as possible.  
Tom Kabat announced that he was on the City of Menlo Park’s 
Environmental Quality Commission and looked forward to working with Palo 
Alto on the common issue of climate change.  
David Coale pointed out that the City had flat-lined since 2013 in regard to 
working on S/CAP goals.  He advised the Council to move away from 
incentives and not continue buying offsets for natural gas. 
Justine Burt shared that all the infrastructure changes, building conversions, 
and traffic changes were to create jobs.  
Kevin wanted to see aggressive actions taken by Council to combat climate 
change.  
Bret Andersen expressed his appreciation regarding Staff’s proposed actions 
and that those actions aligned with the 80 percent by 2030 goal.  
Dashiell Leeds strongly supported the 80 percent below 1990 level by 2030 
goal as well as supported Staff’s Reach Goal.  He predicted that the City was 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
able to reach their target sooner than 2030 of electrifying 80 percent of 
existing City-owned buildings. 
James Hindery did not believe lifestyle change was a reliable solution.  He 
echoed Mr. Leed’s comment regarding City-owned buildings.  
Star Teachout strongly supported Council’s continued work on the S/CAP and 
encouraged Council to be true leaders for other Cities.  She believed the 
COVID-19 Pandemic has shown residents that driving patterns can change.  
Kelsey Banes appreciated Staff for adding public comments and feedback 
into the S/CAP.  Climate goals were not going to be reached unless the City’s 
housing goals were reached.  She wanted to see the potential impacts 
regarding land being used for people versus land being used for cars. 
Alice Kaufman noted that the S/CAP should include adaptation strategies 
along with GHG emission reduction.   
Tina Chow requested that Council take steps in helping homeowners convert 
their homes to all-electric appliances by improving the permitting process. 
Shani Kleinhaus echoed the comments made by Mr. Leeds and Ms. Kaufman.  
She emphasized that native trees and plants were critical to achieve and 
sustain a natural environment.  She requested that Council retain the goals 
that were within the original plan that Staff had removed.  
Josie Gaillard remarked that the City of Menlo Park has come to the same 
conclusions that City Staff has presented to Council.  
Julia Zeitlin urged the Council to find more sustainable and actionable ways 
to reach goals instead of buying natural gas offsets.  Palo Alto needed to 
engage with other organizations and other City Councils.  
Council Member Filseth agreed that emissions were not the only 
environmental axes the City needed to worry about.  He asked if the steps 
made by Council thus far were considered as a low intervention.  
Mr. Eggleston agreed with that assumption.  
Council Member Filseth did not foresee the City hitting the goal of 80 percent 
carbon dioxide reduction by 2030 and that aggressive steps needed to 
happen.  He pointed out that the only way the City was going to reach their 
goal was to ban cars and turn off natural gas. 
Ms. Luong concurred with that assessment.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
Council Member Filseth declared there were three options the City could 
take.  One was to move toward higher interventions like banning cars, the 
second option was to modify the 80 by 2030 goal or three, continue with low 
intervention items.  
Mr. Eggleston added that because of the Reach Goals, the City was moving 
quickly in the right direction.  
Ed Shikada, City Manager noted that carbon-neutral electricity was a 
moderate intervention. 
Council Member Filseth agreed with that statement.  
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired where the City needed help and what ideas could 
be moved forward immediately.  
Mr. Eggleston answered that the consultants would help the City understand 
how far along the spectrum the City needed to go and model the impacts 
and carbon reductions the City would see from taking specific actions. 
Vice Mayor DuBois encouraged Staff not to underestimate their expertise.  
He wanted to see a current draft of the key actions and key indicators. 
Ms. Luong disclosed that the document online was the updated Report and 
included public suggestions.  
Vice Mayor Dubois shared that in terms of mobility, the City needed to 
consider the impacts of the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic.  He saw an 
opportunity to move forward with remote work options and focus more on 
those strategies.  He liked the idea of becoming known as an Electric Vehicle 
City and encouraged electric vehicle ownership.   He questioned what type of 
barriers there were for City-owned buildings reaching 100 percent 
electrification. 
Mr. Eggleston disclosed that the goal was not mentioned until recently, but 
Staff planned to explore it more thoroughly in an upcoming Report they 
were going to be working on.  
Council Member Cormack applauded the Staff for their hard work.  She 
agreed that the City needed to take more aggressive actions.  She requested 
that Council remember who the major industries were within the City before 
moving toward teleworking.  In terms of funding, she wanted to review long 
term funding in the context of all the needs and not make that decision 
individually.    
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
Council Member Kniss wanted clarification on the City’s permit system for 
all-electric homes as well as how much it would cost to convert a house to 
an all-electric.  
Mr. Eggleston clarified that Staff would have to review the City’s current 
infrastructure and see if all-electric homes Citywide could be supported by 
the City’s grid.  
Mr. Shikada agreed that the reinstallation of personal infrastructure was a 
huge issue, but incentive programs could be put in place to encourage the 
change to all-electric.  
Council Member Kniss thought that a common complaint made by the public 
was that there were not enough electric chargers around the City for the 
number of electric cars.  She reiterated that the City should provide a list of 
how much it costs to convert a home to all-electric.  
Mr. Shikada disclosed that Council would be receiving figures on how much it 
was going to cost to convert an entire block to all-electric at a future 
meeting. 
Council Member Tanaka commented that there must be a smooth ramping 
up for residents if there was to be a push to move homes to be all-electric.  
He suggested that Staff investigate offering rebates for residents that 
convert to a heat pump water heater.  He agreed with Vice Mayor DuBois’s 
comments regarding telework.  
Council Member Kou was interested in investigating teleworking as well.   
She wanted to know more about how the City could use native plants and 
trees to reduce carbon.  
Mayor Fine agreed that the City needed to move toward higher interventions 
to achieve the 80 percent by 2030 goal.  Bill financing and an electrification 
mandate warranted broader community discussion.  He agreed that 
transportation and housing needed to be explored more in terms of GHG 
emissions.  He wanted to know if mandating all-electric homes was going to 
challenge the City’s goal to build more housing.  He asked if the City needed 
more tactical goals to achieve broader goals.  
Sylvia Star-Lack, Transportation Manager answered that Staff would take 
suggestions for additional metrics.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired if Staff had investigated providing 
incentives for buying electric bikes or scooters.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
Mr. Eggleston was not aware of any incentives. 
Shiva Swaminathan, Senior Resource Planner interjected that there was 
funding for electric rebates and utilities that were considering providing 
incentives for electric bikes.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to encourage all forms of electric mobility.  
Mr. Shikada added that the City was going to move forward with a scooter 
sharing program once the COVID-19 pandemic was over.  
Council Member Tanaka suggested mitigations be made to help with electric 
bikes that were stolen.  He predicted that protected bike lanes would 
encourage more casual bicyclists to use their bikes more. 
Ms. Star-Lack responded that Staff planned to update the Bike Plan as well 
and mentioned there was a Grant Project underway that looked at protected 
or buffered bike lanes in South Palo Alto.  
Vice Mayor DuBois restated that teleworking was thought to become part of 
normal life and he foresaw incentives that could be implemented to 
encourage more teleworking.   He added that the City has slowed down on 
advanced metering and wanted to see a key indicator for biodiversity. 
Mr. Eggleston shared that Staff would be open to having language about 
biodiversity and could explore that more.  
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to direct 
Staff to continue with its work on the 2020 Sustainability and Climate Action 
Plan (S/CAP) Update and the evaluation of 2020 S/CAP Potential Major Goals 
and Key Actions related to greenhouse gas emissions reduction and direct 
Staff to look at a key indicator for biodiversity.  
Council Member Kniss supported the Motion but suggested that Staff come 
back with a list of items that could be implemented right away as well as the 
cost for those items and timing.  
Council Member Cormack appreciated Council Member Kniss’s comment 
regarding cost.  She believed the next step included communication with 
residents regarding electrification. 
Council Member Filseth thought the addition of communication to residents 
was good as well as Council Member Kniss’s observation on costs.  
Council Member Kou inquired if Staff had spoken to the business community 
regarding electrification.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
Mr. Eggleston shared that there had been outreach when it came to the 
Reach Code. 
Ms. Luong added that a targeted outreach did not happen, but there were 
small business owners who attended the virtual workshop the City held. 
Council Member Kou advised Staff to conduct targeted outreach toward 
businesses.  
Ms. Luong disclosed that Staff was looking at proposing a Reach Code 
Ordinance for non-residential buildings which entailed further outreach to 
the business sector.  
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council took a break at 8:33 P.M. and returned at 8:46 P.M. 
2. 
Review of the Third Quarter Financial Report and Approval of Various 
Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Budget Adjustments to Address Projected 
COVID-19 Impacts. 
Kiely Nose, Chief Financial Officer and Director of Administrative Services 
acknowledged that the Report included year-end projections for the General 
Fund (GF) and specific recommended adjustments.  Targets continued to 
move due to uncertain times, but the Third Quarter financials were still 
within expected conditions.  In the Third Quarter Financial Report, 15 days 
reflected the Shelter in Place Order that went into effect on March 17, 2020, 
due to the Coronavirus (COVID-19).  Initial findings for Transit Occupancy 
Tax (TOT) showed a dropped of 95 percent which resulted in a drop from $2 
to $2.5 million received in monthly revenues to $100,000 to $200,000.  For 
Documentary Transfer Taxes (DTT) there was a drop of 45 to 50 percent 
from prior-year levels.  Staff did not know any more information regarding 
Sales Tax.  Activities that generated a fee were dropping, but overall 
expenses were tracking below budget.  Departmental expenses were 65 
percent of the 2020 Budget and for 2019 the Budget was 67 percent 
expended.  Overall, there was a $23.7 million reduction in the GF Budgeted 
Revenues and that brought the total recommended budget estimates to 
$210 million compared to the original 2020 adjusted budget of $233.7 
million.  Staff was working hard to mitigate and manage the Budget so that 
the $20 million reductions did not come from the Budget Stabilization 
Reserve (BSR).  Included in the Report was a recommended $12 million 
reduction in budgeted expenses to help offset the $23.7 million reductions in 
revenues.  With the proposed savings, the BSR was to endure a draw of 
$11.7 million.  Staff’s recommended action was to review the Financial 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
Report and amend the 2020 Budget Appropriation for the GF, the Capital 
Improvement Project Transfer and the Downtown BID.  
James Hindery was concerned about funding being used for housing for the 
City Manager.  
Xander Koo wanted to see more done by the City in terms of racial equities 
and saw that funding to the Police Department could be cut to help stabilize 
the Budget.  
Onaiza agreed with Mr. Koo that funding should be pulled from the Police 
Department and used in other areas.  
Vice Mayor DuBois explained that the City Manager was returning his 
housing stipend to the City and that funding was pulled from all 
departments, including the Police Department.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to amend the Fiscal Year 2020 Budget Appropriation for various 
funds and various capital projects. 
Council Member Cormack was comfortable with the most aggressive scenario 
that Council chose for the next Fiscal Year.  She commended the Fire 
Department on managing their vacancies down and that 55 percent of the 
expense reductions came from the Capital Budget.  She asked what the BSR 
looked like for the Fiscal Year 2021 if the BSR fell below the 15 percent mark 
for Fiscal Year 2020. 
Ms. Nose divulged that the City would need an additional $3.6 million to 
reach the Council recommended 18.5 percent target for the BSR. 
Council Member Kniss inquired how many hotels accounted for the 95 
percent reduction in TOT revenues.  
Tarun Narayan, Manager of Treasury Debt & Investments answered that of 
the open hotels, 70 percent of the rooms were available but most of them 
had a 95 percent vacancy rate. 
Council Member Kniss felt uneasy about where the City would be in 
December 2020.  She  assumed that with everyone working from home and 
City Hall partially occupied, that saved money. 
Council Member Filseth thanked Staff for reducing the impacts to the BSR.  
Mayor Fine asked if Staff was tracking COVID-19 impacts on a month to 
month basis.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
Ms. Nose explained that Staff formulated month by month projections. 
Mayor Fine thought it would be helpful to have more frequent updates than 
just quarterly updates. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired what the last Sales Tax numbers were for 
the last two weeks of the quarter.  
Ms. Nose explained that the table showed the receipts that the City received 
for the Third Quarter for Sales Tax.  That did not indicate the Sales Tax 
activity through Quarter Three. 
Council Member Tanaka asked what Adjusted Budget meant.  
Ms. Nose shared that the Council adopted a Budget and throughout the year 
the Council adjusted the Budget.  
Council Member Tanaka requested how much money was spent on buying 
hotel rooms for employees. 
Ms. Nose did not know that information.  
Council Member Tanaka was concerned that the budget projections were 
way higher than the current situation for the TOT and the DTT.  
Mr. Shikada noted that the projections were not before the Council and that 
the 5 percent for TOT was only for the last month of the quarter.  
Council Member Kou questioned if there were new State proposals in place 
that affected the Educational Revenue Augmentation Fund (ERAF). 
Ms. Nose explained that there was a formula on how to distribute ERAF 
funds but the formula was under question between several counties and the 
State.  
Council Member Tanaka expressed that hotels had a hope that the City 
would align their TOT rate with surrounding Cities because hotel occupants 
were more price-oriented patrons than business travelers.  He asked Staff to 
explain the increase in police overtime. He mentioned that he was sensitive 
to the public comments regarding the purchase of the City Manager’s house 
at a time when many residents were going through hard times.  
Ms. Nose claimed that the police overtime increase was due to backfill for 
workers' compensation vacancies, additional patrol services in the shopping 
districts and unforeseen incidences. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
3. 
Discussion and Direction to Staff Regarding the: 1) Establishment of a 
Pension Funding Policy, 2) Approval of Contract Number C15159278 
With Bartel Associates for a Six-year Term for Actuary Services in the 
Amount Not-to-Exceed of $132,325, and 3) and Authorization to the 
City Manager to Execute a Contract Amendment Number 1 to Contract 
Number C15159278 to Increase Funding by $97,675 for a Revised 
Total Not-to-Exceed $230,000 for Additional Actuarial Consultant Work 
Related to Long-term Obligations for Pension and Retiree Health 
Liabilities (CONTINUED FROM JUNE 8, 2020). 
Kiely Nose, Chief Financial Officer and Director of Administrative Services 
reported that Palo Alto (City)  maintained the full 6.2 percent additional 
contributions to the 115 Trust Fund as well as the City’s supplemental 
contributions.  
Steve Guagliardo, Principal Management Analyst for Administrative Services 
disclosed that the Finance Committee discussed the item on October 15, 
2019 meeting.  Staff was seeking approval of the Contract and Amendment 
with Bartel Associates.  Also, Staff planned to return to the City Council 
(Council) in the fall of 2020 for the final adoption of the Pension Policy.  Staff 
reviewed the key principles of the Pension Policy and applied them through 
various elements that were discussed with the Finance Committee.  The 
elements included funding goal and timeframe, funding components, 
allowable uses of funding, service delivery outcomes, and fiscal impacts.  
There was broad consensus among the Finance Committee to continue to 
pay the California Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS) Actuarial 
Determined contribution, continue to use the lower Discount Rate to 
calculate the lower cost, and then transfer those funds over to the 115 Trust 
Fund on an annual basis.  Finance Committee was interested in amending 
the Budget Stabilization Reserve (BSR) Policy and a onetime 1-year funding 
was reached in the 115 Trust Fund, the funds were transferred over to 
CalPERS as an additional discretionary payment.  Staff continued to monitor 
CalPERS investment return year to date daily.  Staff provided an example 
Pension Funding Policy for Council to consider and discuss.   
Council Member Filseth reviewed the graph showing fiscal impacts for 
Miscellaneous if the Pension Plan was funded at a 6.2 percent Discount Rate 
for Normal Cost with a purpose to fund the pension to 90 percent within 10 
years.  He asked if the gray bar included both CalPERS calculation of the 
Normal Cost and payment towards amortizing the Unfunded Accrued Liability 
(UAL).  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
Mr. Guagliardo confirmed that was correct. 
Council Member Filseth stated that the UAL was calculated at 7 percent 
which meant that the true UAL was higher than was expressed by CalPERS. 
Mr. Guagliardo restated that the graphs assumed that CalPERS would meet 
the 7 percent rate of return.  
Council Member Filseth restated that the extra cost the City paid ensured 
that the future Liability did not grow bigger in the future.  He inquired why 
extra money was sent to CalPERS and not put in the 115 Trust Fund. 
Mr. Guagliardo noted that Council could direct Staff to go that route. 
Council Member Filseth questioned if there were reasons to think that 
CalPERS investment returns were higher than the returns on the 115 Trust 
Fund. 
Mr. Guagliardo explained that Staff predicted that the returns for the 115 
Trust Fund were going to be 4.5 to 5.5 percent per year.  
Ms. Nose indicated that the City would have to change the Risk Profile for 
the 115 Trust Fund if Council wished to see the same return that CalPERS 
did.  She emphasized that Staff was seeking guidance from Council on what 
the intent was of the 115 Trust Fund and when did the City want that money 
to be available.  
Council Member Filseth summarized that Council moved in a direction of 
separating from CalPERS because the City’s money might not be safe with 
CalPERS. 
Council Member Cormack requested Staff to explain what a Fresh Start 
meant.  
Mr. Guagliardo shared that one option was a Fresh Start that looked at what 
the different bases were and figuring out how to do a Fresh Start without 
altering the CalPERS Contract.  A Contractual Fresh Start locked the City in 
by resigning the contract with CalPERS; the Fresh Start determined what the 
new level would be, which was paid on an annual basis.  
Council Member Cormack advised Staff to reexplain the stacked table 
graphs.  
Mr. Guagliardo gave a brief recap of the graphs that were provided in the 
Council’s Packet. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois summarized that the Finance Committee agreed on a 
target funding level of 90 percent, there was support for additional cost-
sharing from employee’s overtime, and additional funding through the 
Budget process.   
Council Member Kniss noted that the City was never going to catch up and 
was never going to be fully funded.  
Council Member Tanaka questioned why new employees were not able to 
have 401k’s. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney declared that State Law prohibited new 
employees from having a 401k. 
Council Member Tanaka specified that another way was for the City to 
contract work out as much as possible and limit City Staff. 
Mr. Shikada clarified that changes in State Laws no longer allowed for core 
services to be contracted out for any organization.  
Council Member Tanaka requested to know why the Finance Committee 
chose a mix between what the City was currently doing and a more 
aggressive approach. 
Mayor Fine believed that the Finance Committee was concerned about Fresh 
Starts but leaned more towards the more aggressive approach with a 
targeted 90 percent funded. 
Vice Mayor DuBois added that the Finance Committee agreed it should be 
funded over several years with a 90 percent funding target and no Fresh 
Start. 
Council Member Tanaka questioned what the issue was with the concept of a 
Fresh Start. 
Mr. Guagliardo articulated that targeting specific bases could have the same 
effect,  without implementing a contractual Fresh Start.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to know what specific bases meant. 
Mr. Guagliardo explained that any year CalPERS exceeded or fell short of 
their target investment return a new base was accumulated.  That base was 
factored into the UAL, and it then was amortized over the CalPERS schedule.  
Mayor Fine summarized that Staff’s presentation was exactly what the 
Finance Committee had recommended, with the exception of the change 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
that the BSR funds would be at the City Manager’s discretion.  He wondered 
if there should be more specificity regarding the BSR. 
Ms. Nose articulated that Staff had included the City Manager’s discretion to 
move contributions because of the flexibility of it.  She emphasized that only 
when the BSR was over the 18.5 percent target was the City Manager able 
to make changes.  
Vice Mayor DuBois specified that the percentage for the UAL matched the 
CalPERS rate.  
Ms. Nose reported that in terms of the funding ratio, that was correct.  She 
cautioned the Council to keep in mind the balance between being financially 
responsible and keeping an eye on where the rest of the State was with 
regard to employment.  
Vice Mayor DuBois pointed out that cost-sharing with employees was not 
included in the Pension Policy example.  
Mr. Guagliardo affirmed that it had to do with labor negotiations and Staff 
wanted to explore it more.  
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to: 
A. 
Approve the example pension funding policy as outlined in Attachment 
C of Staff Report Number 11407; 
B. 
Approve and authorize the City Manager or his designee to execute 
Contract Number C15159278 with Bartel Associates, dated September 
1, 2015, for an amount not to exceed $132,325 for OPEB and pension 
actuary and analysis services; and  
C. 
Approve and authorize the City Manager or his designee to execute 
Amendment No. 1 to Contract Number C15159278 with Bartel 
Associates to increase the funding by $97,675 for a revised total 
amount Not-To-Exceed $230,000 for additional actuarial consultant 
work related to long-term obligations for pension and retiree health 
liabilities. 
 
Council Member Cormack felt that the balance was right between paying off 
the debts but also preparing for the future.  
 
Council Member Filseth mentioned that the big question was how big the 
115 Trust Fund needed to get before the money was transferred back to 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
CalPERS.  He suggested Staff follow the Finance Committee’s suggestions 
regarding that question.  He disclosed that the target time to amortize 90 
percent of the UAL and how much of the surplus was to be put into the 115 
Trust Fund related to each other.  He asked if the Miscellaneous Plan and 
Safety Plan needed to be treated differently. 
Mr. Guagliardo reported that no decision was required. 
Council Member Filseth inquired if the City was ever going to have to split 
the Miscellaneous Plan and the Safety Plan into two different 115 Trust 
Funds. 
Mr. Guagliardo explained that the 115 Trust Fund was separated by fund and 
all funds from the GF as well as the Enterprise Funds were there.  Staff was 
tracking the 115 Trust Fund from the safety units.  
Council Member Filseth supported the concept of a Fresh Start, but not a 
Contractual Fresh Start. 
Council Member Kniss was troubled by who was on the Board for CalPERS 
and supported the route that the City was moving forward with.  
Council Member Tanaka questioned if Staff and the Council looked at what 
other Cities were doing.  
Council Member Cormack noted that the City was leading in this area and 
there were no other examples.  
Mary Beth Redding, Bartel Associates agreed with Council Member 
Cormack’s comment.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to know what happened to the City’s money 
if other cities were not able to make their payments to CalPERS. 
Mr. Guagliardo stated that the City’s funds were separate from other City’s 
funds.  
Ms. Nose added that under current laws and current contracts with CalPERS 
the City’s money could not be funneled to other agencies. 
Council Member Filseth emphasized that there was a moral hazard problem 
with CalPERS investments that the City needed to watch.  
Council Member Tanaka did not understand why the City would not keep the 
money in a City fund and go for risker returns.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 20 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  6/16/2020 
Ms. Nose commented that Council could revisit the policy and the investment 
strategy regarding the 115 Trust Fund at timed intervals.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired if the Bartel Contract rates had changed. 
Mr. Guagliardo confirmed that the rates have escalated over the years 
because of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) increases. 
Ms. Redding added that the contract had not been requoted since the CPI 
rates had dropped. 
Council Member Tanaka requested that the Motion be split into components. 
Ms. Stump advised that the Motion could be split into sections.  
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING 
MOTION PART A PASSED:  7-0  
MOTION PARTS B AND C PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no  
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:12 P.M. 
