CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 23 
Special Meeting 
January 27, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers at 6:03 P.M. 
Present:  
Cormack, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou; Tanaka arrived at 6:07 P.M. 
Absent: 
DuBois 
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY-POTENTIAL LITIGATION 
Subject: Implementation of California Assembly Bill 5 Effective  
January 1, 2020, Regarding Worker Classification  
Authority: Potential Exposure to Litigation Under Government Code 
Section 54956.9(d)(2) (Multiple Potential Cases, as Defendant). 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth 
to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  5-0 DuBois, Tanaka absent 
Council went into Closed Session at 6:04 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 7:05 P.M. 
Mayor Fine announced no reportable action. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None. 
Oral Communications 
Jack Morton remarked that Palo Alto needed to openly oppose State 
densification.  Within Palo Alto, housing for low-income people was a 
challenge.  He urged the Council to pull the plans for 2423 and 2453 Webster 
and use them as a test example of development in Palo Alto.  Some action 
needed to be taken soon to stop the seceding of Palo Alto to offshore 
billionaires. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Minutes Approval 
2. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the January 13, 2020 Council Meeting. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to approve the Action Minutes for the January 13, 2020 Council 
Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-0 DuBois absent 
Consent Calendar 
Michael Shonafelt, Crown Castle legal counsel addressing Agenda Item 
Number 3, referred to his January 24, 2020 letter and requested removal and 
continuance of the item so that the design could be modified to better comply 
with design standards.   
Bill Ross, addressing Agenda Item Number 3 had no substantive comment in 
light of Mr. Shonafelt's request. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to approve Agenda Item Numbers 3-10. 
3. 
QUASI-JUDICIAL: Deny Appeal by Crown Castle and Uphold the 
Director's Decisions to Deny Wireless Communication Facilities on Wood 
Utility Poles in the Public Right of Way (For Lease to Verizon, Known as 
Crown Castle Cluster 3) in six Locations Within the Downtown North 
Neighborhood [File 17PLN-00450], Zoned Public Facilities.  Locations are 
Adjacent to These Zones/Addresses: RM-30 (205 Everett/251 Emerson, 
243 Hawthorne, and 258 Waverley); RM-D (NP) (482 Everett and 301 
Bryant); RM-15 (201 High). The Project is Exempt from the Provisions 
of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) in Accordance with 
Public Resources Code Section 21080. 
4. 
Review and Acceptance of the Annual Status Report on Development 
Impact Fees for Fiscal Year 2019. 
5. 
Finance Committee Recommends the City Council: 1) Approve the Fiscal 
Year (FY) 2019 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR); 2) 
Approve Amendments to the FY 2019 Budget in Various Funds; 3) 
Approve Recommended use of Excess General Fund Budget Stabilization 
Reserve Funds; and 4) Accept Macias Gini and O'Connell's Audit of the 
City of Palo Alto's Financial Statements as of June 30, 2019, and 
Management Letter. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
6. 
Resolution 9878 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto for the City of Palo Alto to Participate With the City of Sunnyvale in 
the Planning and Development of Cost Estimates for Potential Future 
use of the Sunnyvale Materials Recovery and Transfer Station (SMaRT 
Station) for Processing Solid Waste.” 
7. 
Policy and Services Committee and Staff Recommend the City Council 
Accept the Status Updates of the Audits of: 1) Citywide Cash Handling 
and Travel Expense; 2) Cable Franchise and Public Education and 
Government (PEG) Access Fees; 3) Continuous Monitoring: Overtime; 
and 4) Continuous Monitoring: Payments. 
8. 
Authorization to Amend the Existing Legal Service Agreement With the 
Law Firm of Colantuono, Highsmith & Whatley, PC (Contract 
S17167696) to Increase the Contract Amount by an Additional 
$125,000, Bringing the new Not-to-Exceed Amount of the Contract to 
$295,000, and Increase the Term by one Year; and to Approve a Budget 
Amendment in the General Fund. 
9. 
Authorization to Increase the Existing Legal Services Agreement 
(Contract S18170470) With Meyers Nave, a Professional Law 
Corporation by an Additional $15,000 for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount 
of $205,000 and to Extend the Term to March 30, 2020. 
10. 
Authorization to Amend the Existing Agreement for Litigation Defense 
Services with the Law Firm of Jarvis, Fay & Gibson (Contract 
S15159508) to Increase the Contract Amount by an Additional $125,000 
for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $820,000; and Approve a Budget 
Amendment in the General Fund. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-0 DuBois absent 
City Manager Comments 
11. 
City Manager’s Year in Review.  
Ed Shikada, City Manager reported the Council Priorities for 2019 were Climate 
Change, 
Transportation 
and 
Traffic, 
Grade 
Separations 
and 
Fiscal 
Sustainability.  For the first time, Staff had prepared a Work Plan for each 
Council Priority.  Ordinances and measures that became effective in 2020 and 
that supported the Climate Change Priority included plastics reduction, REACH 
Code, decommissioning the sludge incinerator, an agreement with Valley 
Water and the City of Mountain View, the Reuse Zone, expansion of the Cool 
Block program, Bike Palo Alto Day and Electric Vehicle (EV) adoption.  Projects 
supporting the Transportation and Traffic Priority included completion of the 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Charleston-Arastradero Corridor Project, a Ross Road after Study, a bike and 
scooter-share program and the shuttle program.  In 2019, the Grade 
Separation Priority involved technical work, extensive communications and 
multiple community meetings.  The Council took a number of steps in support 
of the Fiscal Sustainability Priority, including a City Services Guide and a 
potential revenue ballot measure.  Ongoing multiyear efforts pertained to the 
Animal Shelter, art exhibits and programming, and community resiliency.  
Capital projects related to Fire Station 3, the Junior Museum and Zoo, 
pickleball courts, and the Highway 101 Bike Bridge.  Projects for the Baylands 
Boardwalk and the Cubberley running track had been completed.  In 2019, 
the Public Works Department achieved American Public Works Association 
reaccreditation; the Library received the Innovation Award; the Fire 
Department obtained Fire Service recertification; and the Utilities Department 
received the Smart Energy Provider Award and the Energy Innovator Award.  
Ten accomplishments anticipated in 2020 were planning for the Rail Corridor, 
opening the California Avenue Parking Garage, constructing the Public Safety 
Building (PSB), opening the Junior Museum and Zoo, updating the 
Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP), replacing Fire Station 4, 
expanding the Bicycle Boulevard initiative, opening the Bike Bridge, expanding 
electrification options and launching a new City website.   
Mayor Fine noted the new Baylands Boardwalk was a huge improvement.  
Recertification of the Fire Department was quite important.   
Council Member Kniss asked which of the 2020 projects had the most 
challenges.   
Mr. Shikada indicated grade separation would be challenging given the 
difficulty of choosing from the options. 
Council Member Kniss inquired about new and innovative sustainability 
changes the City could initiate in 2020.  Perhaps Greta Thunberg was able to 
visit the City. 
Mr. Shikada advised that a visit from Ms. Thunberg could inspire the 
community. 
Council Member Kniss suggested the Council host a night with Phil Bobel to 
discuss recycling.  She asked if the City purchased recycled Projects from 
Green Waste. 
Mr. Shikada was not familiar with products the City might buy.  As part of 
updating the S/CAP, the Public Works team was available for discussion. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Council Member Kniss expressed interest in learning the details of recycling 
waste as China was no longer purchasing recyclable materials. 
Mr. Shikada planned on asking Staff to prepare for discussion of recycling 
during the Council Retreat. 
Council Member Cormack remarked that the Public Works team would be 
extremely busy with Construction Projects in 2020.  The Council needed to 
provide them with the necessary support to accomplish the projects. 
Council Member Kniss added that the Construction Projects were a good use 
of Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) revenues.   
Mayor Fine concurred with the statement that the view of the correct 
transportation or mobility improvements was subjective.  The Council and 
Staff had many ideas of what could be done, but understanding which would 
positively affect parking and traffic was difficult.  Goals were reducing travel 
time from South Palo Alto to University Avenue or reducing the amount of 
time searching for parking or the number of bike lanes paved or painted.  
Grade separations were one of the biggest challenges for the Council and 
required discipline and focus.  He encouraged residents to review the City 
Services Guide.   
NO ACTION TAKEN  
Action Items 
12. 
Staff Update and Council Consideration Regarding Polling Results, 
Analysis, and Public Outreach and Potential Direction Regarding a 
Possible Local Tax Ballot Measure for the 2020 Election. 
Steve Guagliardo, Administrative Services Management Analyst reported the 
Council provided direction to Staff on September 16, 2019 regarding a ballot 
measure.  During the fall of 2019, Staff, the Council and the Finance 
Committee (Committee) worked through the directions, and the Council 
discussed polling on December 2, 2019.  On December 17, 2019, the 
Committee reached broad consensus regarding a number of elements of a 
Business Tax and referred some items to the Council for discussion.  The 
Committee recommended the Council consider a Business Tax by employee 
headcount, a Parcel Tax by square footage, and Business Tax by square 
footage.  A tax needed escalators, not a sunset provision, it needed to be 
implemented online, be administratively feasible and to be enforceable.  The 
Finance Committee recommended the Council determine characteristics such 
as Specific or General Tax, the effected taxpayers, tiered or flat rate, tiers 
based on business use, and exemptions based on business use.  The 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Committee requested Staff work on a metric for the average dollars by number 
of employees in comparable cities and develop proposed uses of the funds.  
Results of the initial public opinion poll was to be presented to the Council.  
Staff requested direction to continue progress on the topic and feedback 
regarding the type and metric of a tax, the target magnitude of revenues and 
tiers and exemptions.  The Council needed to consider the structure, revenue 
and modeling and administration of a tax.  He reviewed the voter passage 
rate, legally required exemptions, rate structure, Council policy exemptions, 
annual revenue, data source and administration of a Parcel Tax by square 
footage, a Business Tax by headcount, and a Business Tax by square footage. 
Dave Metz, FM3 Research designed a Two-phase Survey Research Project.  
The initial phase made understood the broad parameters of public opinion 
regarding a Business Tax and identify preferences for structural elements of a 
tax.  The initial survey was not designed to assess the viability of a tax.  A 
second polling focused on the viability of potential tax measures.  The survey 
interviewed 514 Palo Alto voters between January 13 and 20, 2020.  The 
margin of error for the survey was 4.9 percent.  About a third of voters 
indicated some need for additional funding while 38 percent indicated little 
need or no real need for additional funding.  The numbers were similar to polls 
conducted over the past decade.  In contrast to prior polls, a sizeable 
proportion of voters indicated they did not know enough to offer an evaluation.  
This difference was likely the result of the question being asked first rather 
than fourth or fifth as in prior polls.  Seventy-seven percent of voters rated 
the cost of housing as a very serious problem, and 51 percent rated it as an 
extremely serious problem.  Traffic and congestion on local streets and roads 
were also rated as very serious by 53 percent of voters.  A modest number of 
issues were rated as very serious problems by less than three in ten voters.  
Only 13 percent of voters rated the amount local businesses pay in City taxes 
as a very serious problem; however, 48 percent indicated they did not have a 
clear opinion on the issue.  The concern about homelessness had doubled 
since 2016 but was rated vastly lower in Palo Alto than in most parts of the 
Bay Area.  Concern about the cost of housing had not changed over the past 
four years.  Overall, the support for the concept of a Business Tax was broad 
with two-thirds of voters willing to support such a concept, but more than 
twice as many indicated they would be inclined to vote against it.  Slightly 
more than one-quarter of voters indicated they would definitely vote yes.  The 
lack of details was probably the reason for voters not indicating definite 
support or opposition to a Business Tax.  Democrats were supportive.  A 
majority of independents were also supportive but by a much narrower 
margin.  Republicans opposed a tax by a margin of approximately 2:1.  
Women voters favored a tax by a 46 point margin, men by a 27 point margin.  
Age differences were relatively modest with voters under 50 supporting a tax 
at approximately the 70 percent level.  About 60 percent of voters over 50 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
supported a tax.  Among voters who also owned businesses, support was 
comparable to voters who did not own businesses.  Among the voters who 
saw a great need for additional funding, more than nine of ten supported the 
concept.  The voters who expressed uncertainty about the need for additional 
funding were fairly supportive of a tax.  About half of yes voters focused on 
the use of tax revenues.  A sizeable amount of yes voters indicated businesses 
were undertaxed and needed to pay more.  The dominant concerns expressed 
by opponents to a tax were taxes were already too high and the tax would 
have a negative impact on small businesses.  After hearing a brief exchange 
of pro and con statements, the yes vote increased from 64 percent to 65 
percent; the no vote increased from 27 percent to 30 percent, and the 
undecided vote was cut roughly in half.  The issue of providing affordable 
housing was divisive for voters with 40 percent rating it extremely important 
and 19 percent rating it not important.  The highest priorities were emergency 
communications, traffic congestion, seismic safety, and street and road 
improvements.  Fifty four percent of voters rated providing subsidized housing 
for low-income residents as extremely important or very important.  
Maintaining City buildings was ranked as the lowest priority.  A legal 
requirement that all funds be used as promised in the measure received the 
most support followed by a requirement for annual independent audits.  A 
Parcel Tax based on square footage was the most popular tax structure with 
70 percent support.  A Business Tax based on headcount received 65 percent 
support.  A Payroll Tax based on salaries received 53 percent support.  Sixty-
nine percent of voters supported an exemption for small businesses.  An 
exemption for medical businesses received 53 percent support.  Lower tax 
rates for small businesses received broad support, and lower tax rates for 
retail businesses received majority support.  Forty-three percent of voters 
preferred a General Purpose Tax while 45 percent preferred a Special Purpose 
Tax.  After hearing the pros and cons for a General Purpose Tax and a Special 
Purpose Tax, 42 percent favored a General Purpose Tax, and 50 percent 
favored a Special Purpose Tax.  Use of the funds for improving transportation, 
providing more housing, and improving safety at railroad crossings received 
84 percent support, 71 percent support, and 67 percent support respectively.  
When choosing one of the three uses, 41 percent of voters chose housing.  
Generally, younger voters prioritized housing.  Voters preferred a tax with 
tiered rates over a flat-rate tax by a margin of 78 percent to 15 percent.  After 
hearing the pros and cons of tiered rates and a flat rate, the numbers 
remained constant.  Forty-eight percent of voters supported tax rates 
comparable to those in other cities while 30 percent supported tax rates higher 
than other cities' rates.  After hearing pros and cons for higher rates, 
comparable rates, and lower rates, the preference for comparable rates held 
steady.  After hearing pros and cons for the three mechanisms of a tax, 
support for a Parcel Tax based on square footage decreased from 70 percent 
to 48 percent; support for a Headcount Tax decreased from 65 percent to 57 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
percent; and support for a Payroll Tax increased from 53 percent to 58 
percent.  Overall, voters seemed to be open to a Business Tax in concept, 
were split between a General Purpose Tax and a Special Purpose Tax, 
supported a tiered tax rate, supported a lower tax rate or exemption for small 
businesses, opposed a Parcel Tax based on square footage, and supported a 
tax rate comparable to that in surrounding communities.   
Charles Heath, TBWB indicated an online survey would launch later in the 
week for businesses.  The goals of the survey were to obtain a broad-based 
understanding of the variety of businesses in the community and to open a 
dialog with business leadership groups.  The survey was to remain open for 
three weeks.  Follow-up targeted businesses that seemed underrepresented 
in the survey.  Information needed to be ready to share with the Committee 
in mid-February, 2020 and the Council in March, 2020 and prior to the next 
round of polling. 
Mr. Guagliardo related that Figure 1 of the City Manager’s Report (CMR) 
represented an initial step in addressing the Committee's request for a 
comparison of business taxes by employee.  Numbers in the column entitled 
"Projected Total Employment in the City" were taken from projections 
prepared by the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG).  Staff is 
working with the California Employee Development Department (EDD) to 
generate data for each city.  A number of positions were legally exempted 
from a Headcount Tax.  One percent of bonded revenue totaled $21.1 million, 
5 percent $105.6 million, and 10 percent $211.1 million.  Choices for the 
Council were the tax method, taxation level and rate structure.   
Kiely Nose, Director of Administrative Services and Chief Financial Officer 
cautioned that the projected average tax per employee could create a false 
narrative because it included exempt employees.   
Charlie Weidanz, Palo Alto Chamber of Commerce noted there had been little 
outreach to the business community.  A Headcount Tax was too much of a 
variable to be applied fairly and would affect small businesses too harshly.  A 
Parcel Tax was unfair because it was passed to tenants.  The discussion of 
using revenues for housing was slightly misleading in that two Affordable 
Housing Projects were approved in the prior six years, developers were not 
eager to build Affordable Housing Projects, land was not available, and 
developers were not able to afford land or renovation costs for Below Market 
Rate (BMR) housing.   
Bob Moss commented that businesses were responsible for traffic congestion 
and the jobs/housing imbalance.  A tax needed to be based on the number of 
employees because employees created the jobs/housing imbalance and traffic 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
congestion.  A Business Tax was fair if there were exemptions for nonprofits, 
educational services and businesses with less than 5 or 10 employees.  The 
tax needed to be a General Tax.   
Dan Kostenbauder, Silicon Valley Leadership Group felt support was limited 
for the idea that the City needed additional revenue.  Silicon Valley Leadership 
Group supported a tax if it was a Special Tax.  A study conducted 
approximately ten years ago found that businesses paid approximately 60 
percent of City revenues.  The absence of a Business Tax was a competitive 
advantage for the City of Palo Alto. 
Tiffany Griego, Stanford Research Park requested the City prepare a fiscal 
impact analysis.  Companies in Stanford Research Park generated 
approximately $20 million per year in revenues for the City.  Only 7 percent 
of survey respondents saw a great need for additional funding.  Respondents 
believed the tax should be a Special Tax.  Small business needed to be 
defined.  If small businesses were exempt, a small minority of businesses were 
going to pay a Business Tax.   
Keith Reckdahl urged the Council to institute a Business Tax and to consider 
all rail crossings, including Palo Alto Avenue, when determining the amount of 
revenues needed to fund grade separations. 
Council took a break at 8:37 P.M. and returned at 8:49 P.M. 
Mayor Fine requested comments from the Committee. 
Council Member Cormack encouraged the Council and community to read CMR 
Number 
10655 
to 
understand 
the 
issues 
and 
the 
Committee's 
recommendations.   
Mayor Fine added that the Committee felt a Headcount Tax would be the 
easiest to administer and would have the greatest nexus between uses and 
needs.  The Committee was interested in an escalator and ease of 
administration and recommended the Council decide between a Specific or a 
General Tax.  
Council Member Tanaka requested the data source file for the survey.   
Mr. Metz agreed to provide it. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the survey included a question of whether 
the respondent worked in Palo Alto. 
Mr. Metz advised that the question was removed from the survey. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Council Member Tanaka felt more Palo Alto residents worked than owned a 
business.   
Mr. Metz agreed to include the question in the next survey. 
Council Member Tanaka noted Attachment A and requested the number 
represented by the language of "a growing number of successful businesses."   
Ed Shikada, City Manager clarified that the phrase was not intended to be a 
statement of fact.  It paraphrased an argument that a supporter might make. 
Council Member Tanaka believed such statements should be true and 
quantifiable and wanted to know the source of the misconception that 
emergency communications needed updates and improvements. 
Mr. Shikada explained that the option was intended to obtain a sense of voters' 
priority for emergency communications.  The statement did not indicate there 
was a problem with the existing system. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked that the reasons for needing additional tax 
revenues should be true.  The City had one of the best emergency 
communications systems.  Making statements solely to obtain voter approval 
of a tax seemed to be deceitful.  If money was needed for grade separations, 
the statements needed to reflect that; the statements needed to represent 
the truth.  He hoped ballot language would contain true statements.  The 
Council ought not impose a tax just because the voters were for it.  The Council 
did not know the amount of funds needed for grade separations; he thought 
the Council should identify the problem first and then find funds to solve the 
problem.  He noted the decline in voters who believed the City needed 
additional funding and the increase in voters who believed the City was 
inefficient.  The Council had to focus on transportation, identify the problem, 
determine the cost and then propose a tax.  Some companies told him they 
would leave the City if the City imposed a Business Tax.  The Council needed 
to direct Staff to conduct a Fiscal Impact Study.  The polling seemed to 
indicate support for a lower or no tax on smaller businesses, but that shifted 
the tax burden to larger businesses.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the question about public safety was 
included in the survey in order to compare it to prior polls. 
Mr. Metz answered yes.  The question included a range of uses for tax 
revenues that had been tested in prior surveys.  The base case ballot measure 
concept used in the survey did not mention public safety or 9-1-1 
communications as part of the package. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Council Member Cormack did not believe lying or deceit had occurred in the 
survey.   
Council Member Filseth inquired regarding the degree of prescriptiveness of a 
Special Purpose Tax. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney advised that the Council could determine the 
specificity. 
Council Member Filseth asked if a tax designated for housing and 
transportation could be a Special Purpose Tax. 
Ms. Stump indicated a Special Purpose Tax could be described at a fairly high 
level of generality. 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether a General Purpose Tax with an 
advisory measure was an option. 
Ms. Stump replied yes.  At one point, the two were discussed as a way to 
propose a General Purpose Tax with a clear and solid intention for its use.  
However, general intentions were typically incorporated into the ballot 
question. 
Ms. Nose added that some level of reporting on the use of revenues could be 
required in the measure. 
Ms. Stump reported the Council had the option to adopt a Resolution or 
Ordinance to express their intentions for a General Purpose Tax.  The 
Resolution or Ordinance was able to be amended at a later time.   
Council Member Filseth asked whether headcount or payroll was easier to 
measure. 
Ms. Nose related that payroll was extremely difficult to measure. 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether building square footage was easy to 
measure. 
Ms. Nose stated each of the proposed tax structures had issues.  Cities had 
figured out ways to implement each structure.  A Business Tax based on 
square footage was more difficult to measure than a Parcel Tax based on 
square footage.   
Council Member Kniss requested comment on the statement that Palo Alto 
was the only City in California without a Business Tax. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Ms. Nose needed to research the matter. 
Council Member Kniss asked if the changes reflected in polling since 2016 
were also reflected in other cities polls. 
Mr. Metz reported the conceptual support found in Palo Alto was probably the 
same across the Bay Area.   
Council Member Kniss requested comment regarding the difference between 
affordable housing and subsidized housing. 
Mr. Metz clarified that half of voters heard the question about affordable 
housing and half the question about subsidized housing.  Subsidized housing 
was ranked slightly lower than affordable housing. 
Council Member Kniss expressed concern that people viewed the two 
descriptions quite differently.  If a ballot measure mentioned housing, the 
intention was subsidized housing.  She questioned the perception a voter had 
of a Special Tax for housing and transportation.   
Mr. Metz explained that a second round of polling identified the public's 
perception.  In the first round, the voters' reaction to subsidized housing was 
neither negative nor as positive as affordable housing.  The two descriptions 
yielded significantly different results.   
Council Member Kou asked if the survey gauged the community's interests 
and needs. 
Mr. Metz advised that the viability of a tax measure could not be determined 
from the results.  The goal of the data was to provide a sense of the 
community's enthusiasm and understanding for a tax measure.   
Council Member Kou noted public safety and emergency preparedness 
continued to be primary concerns.  Perhaps the language of "due to a growing 
number of successful businesses" was to be revised to "high growth of large 
tech businesses."  She inquired whether a second round of more focused 
polling or a business survey was to occur next. 
Ms. Nose reported the Work Plan included the option for a second round of 
refined polling.  In order to conduct a second round, the focus of polling had 
to be narrowed.   
Council Member Kou asked if a survey of businesses was to occur next. 
Ms. Nose clarified that stakeholder outreach to businesses was to occur.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Council Member Kou requested Staff include Midtown and Charleston Plaza 
businesses in outreach.  She inquired whether voters knew that hotels were 
highly taxed when responding to survey questions. 
Mr. Metz indicated that type of information would be included in a second poll 
if the Council wanted to include hospitality businesses in a tax measure. 
Council Member Kou asked if survey respondents knew that Palo Alto did not 
have a tax and that surrounding cities did have a tax.   
Mr. Metz reiterated that that would be included in a second round of polling.   
Council Member Kou suggested polling include the fact that companies paid 
only a one-time Development Impact Fee.  She inquired whether a survey 
question included the types of housing from luxury to BMR.   
Mr. Metz related that a second survey gauged interest in types of housing if 
the Council focused a measure on housing.  Most research around the Bay 
Area showed that voters were enthusiastic about providing more housing at 
all levels, particularly for middle-income and BMR families.   
Council Member Kou wanted to ensure the community understood that BMR 
housing was funded by the City.   
Mayor Fine believed there was a tension between responding to and taking 
advantage of polling and advancing the community's and City's interests.  He 
inquired whether the next step of polling was to test the approximate ballot 
language of a Business Tax. 
Mr. Metz reported a second round could indicate whether a tax model was 
viable for the November, 2020 election.   
Mayor Fine asked if Staff would begin working with the Business Stakeholder 
Group. 
Mr. Guagliardo clarified that stakeholder engagement was to begin prior to a 
second round of polling and continue with discussion of polling results. 
Mayor Fine asked if a Citizen Oversight Committee had been used previously 
and how it functioned. 
Ms. Nose advised that the Council could determine whether oversight was 
annual reporting or formation of a committee.   
Mayor Fine asked if the language of the Stormwater Measure included the 
structure of the oversight committee. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Ms. Nose did not recall whether the ballot language set out the structure. 
Mayor Fine inquired whether other cities used an escalator equal to the Bay 
Area Consumer Price Index (CPI) with a cap. 
Ms. Nose responded yes. 
Mayor Fine felt a definition of small business and rate tiers were primary 
concerns for the Council.  The Council needed to understand the size of Palo 
Alto businesses and the consequences of rate tiers on small businesses.  He 
inquired whether other cities were considering a tax measure for November. 
Ms. Nose advised that a survey of cities' proposed ballot measures was 
underway, and Staff could provide information from it at the appropriate time. 
Mayor Fine inquired regarding the possibility of proposing a 2020 or 2022 
Parcel Tax to fund affordable housing. 
Ms. Nose indicated the Council could decide to explore such a Parcel Tax; 
however, Staff workload and ballot saturation needed to be considered. 
Mayor Fine interpreted the polling data as “housing was a priority.”  The 
Committee discussed a Business Tax as a nexus to transportation.  A 
Headcount Tax with an exemption or discounted rate for small businesses was 
preferable.  Transportation and grade separation had the clearest nexus to a 
Business Tax and had good support among the community.   
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to direct Staff to develop a potential local tax ballot measure including 
but not limited to: 
A. 
Business Tax by Employee Headcount;  
B. 
Tiered tax rate; and 
C. 
A specific tax. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked that transportation had a clear nexus to a 
Business Tax.  A Headcount Tax was easiest to administer.  Tiered rates were 
logical given the number of small businesses in the community.   
Council Member Kniss inquired about prior engagement with the business 
community.  Approval of a Business Tax required the support of the business 
community.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Mr. Shikada reported little engagement had occurred with the business 
community.  Based on Council direction, Staff had sufficient details to engage 
the business community. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion Part C. “… related to 
transportation. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion Part C. “… and housing.” 
Council Member Tanaka expressed concern about a nexus between a Business 
Tax and housing. 
Council Member Kniss asked if the Motion should contain language regarding 
ease of administration and payment of a tax. 
Ms. Nose suggested the Council provide feedback for all elements of the 
Committee's recommendation. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed with using an escalator; however, the amount 
of the escalator needed to be determined annually. 
Council Member Kniss asked if a Business Tax typically included a sunset 
provision. 
Mr. Guagliardo reported many recent Business Taxes did not include sunset 
provisions.  The Council had options for an escalator.  
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion “consider an escalator as a 
preference.” (New Part D) 
Council Member Kniss agreed to not including a sunset provision. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “Online and administratively 
easy filing available, including having some ability to enforce the filings.”   
(New Part E) 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “Direct Staff to do a fiscal 
impact study.” (New Part F)  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion as new Part G, “0.5 percent of 
the General Fund.” 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Tanaka moved, 
seconded by Council Member Kniss to direct Staff to develop a potential local 
tax ballot measure including, but not limited to:  
A. 
Business Tax by Employee Headcount;  
B. 
Tiered tax rate;  
C. 
A specific tax related to transportation and housing; 
D. 
Consider an escalator as a preference;  
E. 
Online and administratively easy filing available, including having some 
ability to enforce the filings; 
F. 
Direct Staff to do a fiscal impact study; and  
G. 
0.5 percent of the General Fund.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by 
Council Member Filseth to direct Staff to develop a potential local tax ballot 
measure including, but not limited to: 
A. 
 General Business Tax based on Employee Headcount;  
B. 
Raises approximately $10 million per year; 
C. 
Used for transportation projects and services;  
D. 
Tiers with no additional exemptions that charges small businesses a flat 
minimal amount; and 
E. 
Includes an annual reporting requirement and an escalator clause. 
Council Member Cormack referred to the nexus and ease of administering a 
Headcount Tax.  Five percent of the General Fund needed to be the upper limit 
for tax revenues.  $10 million was 4.3 percent of the General Fund and 7.6 
percent of the current amount of tax revenues.  San Francisco was an outlier 
rather than a comparable city.  The tax was able to provide $100 million over 
time toward transportation needs, which were significant.  A tiered tax rate 
was progressive.  The Council needed data before determining exemptions.  
Small businesses needed register and pay a small fee in order to provide the 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
City with data.  The earliest tax revenues were able to be collected was two 
years from now.  A Specific Tax restricted funds and allowed the community 
to see inflows and outflows; however, the City's future needs were possibly 
different.  A Parcel Tax was a great and stable means to produce affordable 
housing.   
Council Member Filseth noted grade separations would improve traffic rather 
than safety.  The Council probably wanted to hear the business community's 
priorities.  At this point, use of the revenues for housing needed not be 
precluded.  He thought the Council should not rely on the State or region to 
balance housing and jobs.  The 4 percent range was able to be adjusted as 
data was collected.  A Nominal Tax on small businesses was logical.  The tax 
was probably not likely to drive many companies away from Palo Alto.   
Council Member Kniss felt $10 million a year was high.  She inquired about a 
mechanism to ensure revenues were used for Transportation Projects and 
services. 
Council Member Cormack indicated the Motion included an annual reporting 
requirement.  With transportation as a community priority, the future Council 
was likely to utilize revenues for large Transportation Projects.   
Council Member Kniss did not support a General Tax.  Businesses were likely 
more comfortable with a Specific Tax.   
Council Member Tanaka proposed adding a Fiscal Impact Study to the 
Substitute Motion. 
Council Member Cormack requested Staff comment regarding the work 
involved in such a Study. 
Mr. Shikada reported a Study could be very elaborate and include a 
Consultant's Report.  The conclusions of any consultant was expected to be 
attacked.  Staff discussed holding a forum of experts with a variety of 
perspectives and then providing the experts' opinions to the Council.  The 
Council was going to have to draft a scope of work for a Fiscal Impact Study. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Mr. Shikada's comments were interpreted 
as a Fiscal Impact Study and they may not be helpful to the Council. 
Mr. Shikada clarified that Staff would have to establish credibility for an 
analysis and potential impacts on the business environment.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether data from other cities' experiences 
was helpful. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Mr. Shikada advised that preparing an economic model that included data 
from other cities was a significant undertaking. 
Ms. Nose indicated the City was unique in that other cities had revised an 
existing Business Tax.   
Council Member Filseth added that the usefulness of a Fiscal Impact Study 
depended on the scope of work.   
Council Member Cormack recalled a statement that this type of information 
could be identified during stakeholder outreach. 
Council Member Filseth did not object to some understanding of the impacts. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE SUBSTITUTE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT 
OF THE MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Substitute Motion, “direct 
Staff to do a fiscal impact study.” (New Part F) 
Council Member Tanaka concurred that $10 million was too high because 
many Palo Alto businesses were small or were startups.  Other cities had large 
companies that generated high profits.  Mr. Levy, an expert in fiscal issues, 
had not recommended exceeding 2 percent.   
Council Member Kou asked if the item would return to the Committee or the 
Council. 
Mr. Shikada thought the Council should determine next steps. 
Council Member Cormack suggested the Fiscal Impact Study and rate tiers 
return to the Committee in February, 2020, and the remaining items return 
to the Council in March, 2020.   
Mr. Guagliardo reported preparing a Fiscal Impact Study to present to the 
Committee in February, 2020 would be more than ambitious. 
Council Member Kniss remarked that a ballot measure had to be filed in 
August, 2020. 
Mr. Guagliardo indicated the last date to file a ballot measure was August 7, 
2020. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE  SUBSTITUTE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT 
OF THE MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Substitute Motion, “bring this 
back to Council directly.” (New Part G) 
Council Member Kou noted small business had to be defined. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Ms. Nose advised that Staff define small business as part of the modeling.   
Council Member Kou asked if Staff or an independent party would prepare 
annual reporting.  
Council Member Cormack replied Staff.   
Ms. Nose related that the annual reporting could be a Staff Report, an internal 
audit or a component of the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR). 
Council Member Kou requested a portion of tax revenues be used for BMR 
housing.   
Council Member Cormack asked if Council Member Kou wished to designate a 
dollar amount or a percentage. 
Council Member Filseth proposed reviewing the second round of polling before 
adding housing. 
Council Member Cormack commented that learning whether support increased 
or decreased would be interesting.  Comments about the description of 
affordable housing were incredibly important.   
Council Member Filseth indicated there was some nexus between employment 
and demand for affordable housing. 
Mr. Shikada asked if the Council wanted business community feedback on the 
inclusion of housing. 
Council Member Filseth replied yes. 
Council Member Cormack concurred.  She inquired whether polling questions 
could refer to transportation or transportation and affordable housing. 
Mr. Metz advised that it would be manageable.  As long as each model 
contained some specificity, the two models were able to be compared. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE SUBSTITUTE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT 
OF THE MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Substitute Motion Part C, “… 
or transportation and affordable housing.”  
Mr. Shikada requested Part F be revised to direct Staff to study fiscal and 
business impacts through the stakeholder engagement process. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE SUBSTITUTE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT 
OF THE MAKER AND SECONDER to amend the Substitute Motion Part F to 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
state “direct staff to study fiscal and business impacts through the stakeholder 
engagement process.” 
Mayor Fine asked if a Business Tax on a utility would be passed to ratepayers. 
Ms. Nose explained that the City of Palo Alto Utilities, as an agency of a 
municipal government, was exempt from a Business Tax. 
Council Member Cormack noted another city, perhaps Cupertino, had 
exempted utilities from a Business Tax.   
Ms. Stump advised that few cities offered all public utilities. 
Ms. Nose indicated Staff would investigate the issue. 
Mayor Fine felt a General Tax supporting grade separation today and 
potentially climate change in the future made some sense.  An advisory 
provided some confidence that revenues would be spent responsibly.  The $10 
million was higher than he had considered but was reasonable.  If the Council 
advanced a Business Tax, business development services were necessary. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE SUBSTITUTE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT 
OF THE MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Substitute Motion Part F, “… 
and recommend an economic development program.”  
Council Member Kniss requested a timeline for next steps. 
Mr. Guagliardo reported the Council would discuss polling in February, 2020. 
Ms. Nose indicated the Council discussion would probably occur in March, 
2020. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed a subcommittee discuss polling and make 
recommendations to the Council.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED: Council Member 
Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth to direct Staff to 
develop a potential local tax ballot measure including, but not limited to: 
A. 
General Business Tax based on Employee Headcount;  
B. 
Raise approximately $10 million per year;  
C. 
Used for transportation projects and services or transportation and 
affordable housing;  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
D. 
Tiers with no additional exemptions that charge small businesses a flat 
minimal amount;  
E. 
Include an annual reporting requirement and an escalator clause;  
F. 
Direct Staff to study fiscal and business impacts through the stakeholder 
engagement process, and recommend an economic development 
program; and 
G. 
Bring this back to City Council directly. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  4-2 Kniss, Tanaka no, 
DuBois absent  
13. 
Approval of: 1) Agreement Between the City of Palo Alto Representing 
the Cable Joint Powers and Midpeninsula Community Media Center, Inc. 
for Public, Education, and Government Access (PEG) Channel Support 
Services; 2) Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) Between the Cable 
Joint Powers Covering the use of PEG Fees; 3) Contribution Agreement 
With Midpeninsula Community Media Center, Inc. in the Amount of 
$511,536, Equivalent to PEG Fees Used for Council Chambers Upgrade 
Project; and 4) Amendment to the Fiscal Year 2020 Budget 
Appropriation in the Technology Fund. 
David Ramberg, Assistant Director of Administrative Services reported the 
Council governed the Cable Joint Powers Authority (JPA).  Cable franchise 
holders paid Public, Education, and Government (PEG) Access Fees of 
approximately $300,000 for the use of right-of-way for cable distribution 
infrastructure.  The Midpeninsula Community Media Center (Media Center) 
was the designated provider of PEG and the recipient of PEG Fees.  In 2019, 
the Council directed Staff to pursue a building purchase.  However, the current 
structure of the JPA was not able to hold title to real property, and PEG 
revenues were declining.  Staff proposed a grant process whereby JPA cities 
would provide PEG revenue to the Media Center in the amount of PEG Projects 
within the individual cities.  In this way, PEG revenues were provided to the 
Media Center more quickly.  A grant process was able to be implemented 
under the existing JPA.  This was a good short-term solution while Staff 
learned about future PEG revenues.  The grant process was available to any 
entity in the JPA service area, and any PEG-related Project was eligible for a 
grant.  The project had to have approved funding by the entity.  PEG revenue 
equivalent to the value of the project was sent to the entity, and the entity 
sent unrestricted funds in the same amount to the Media Center.  The Media 
Center utilized the funds to support operations.  JPA members had either 
approved the process or were scheduled to approve it pending City of Palo 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Alto approval.  The Media Center's Board of Directors had approved the 
process.   
Sue Purdy Pelosi, Midpeninsula Community Media Center believed support of 
community creativity built a vital and vibrant community and economy.  
Everyone needed the opportunity to learn to use the latest technologies.  
Media literacy helped people interpret and respond effectively to messages.  
The Media Center offered numerous classes, and its 300 volunteers created 
hundreds of programs.  The agreements allowed the Media Center to form 
stronger bonds with JPA cities.   
Mayor Fine commented on the great service the Media Center provided the 
community.  The long-term viability of PEG revenues was an issue.   
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to: 
A. 
Approve a five-year agreement between the City of Palo Alto, 
representing the Cable Joint Powers (cities of Palo Alto, East Palo Alto, 
and Menlo Park, the Town of Atherton and portions of San Mateo and 
Santa Clara counties), and Midpeninsula Community Media Center, Inc., 
for public, education, and government (PEG) access channel support 
services;  
B. 
Approve and authorize the City Manager to execute a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) between the Cable Joint Powers covering the use 
of PEG support fees paid by Comcast, AT&T, and any other State 
Franchisee;  
C. 
Approve and authorize the City Manager to execute a contribution 
agreement between the City of Palo Alto and the Midpeninsula 
Community Media Center, Inc., in the amount of $511,536, equivalent 
to the amount in PEG support fees to be expended by the City on the 
Council Chambers Upgrade project;  
D. 
Amend the Fiscal Year 2020 Budget Appropriation Ordinance for the 
Technology Fund by:  
i. 
Recognizing $511,536 in Revenue from Other Agency for the City 
Council Chambers Upgrade (TE-19001) capital project; and  
ii. 
Appropriating $511,536 for Inter-Agency Expenses for Media 
Center operations. 
Council Member Kniss concurred with Mayor Fine's comments.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 23 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/27/2020 
Council Member Filseth agreed that a five year agreement was preferable to 
a 20 year agreement given the changing market and technology. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated the creative proposal. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-0 DuBois absent 
State/Federal Legislation Update/Action 
None.  
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack reported the Bay Area Water Supply and 
Conservation Agency water transfer did not occur.  The San Francisquito Creek 
Joint Powers Authority was preparing an amendment to the agreement based 
on a name change.  The Ad Hoc Committee for City Boards and Commissions 
presented a report at the end of February.  The new Art Center exhibit was 
excellent.   
Council Member Kou advised that the Santa Clara/Santa Cruz Community 
Roundtable had adopted a good Strategic Plan and Work Plan.  The Local Policy 
Makers Group (LPMG) received a presentation from High Speed Rail and 
Caltrain.  The Caltrain Business Plan was going to be complete in the spring. 
Council Member Kniss indicated the Silicon Valley Leadership Group's housing 
solutions summit was held the prior week.  She announced she had been 
reelected to the Bay Area Air Quality Management District.   
Mayor Fine noted the Council Retreat was scheduled for Saturday at 8:30 A.M. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:49 P.M. 
