CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 22 
Special Meeting 
February 3, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers at 5:00 P.M. 
Present:  
Cormack; DuBois arrived at 5:10 P.M., Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, 
Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Special Orders of the Day 
1. 
Recognition of Palo Alto City Library 2020 Kids and Teen Writing 
Contest Winners. 
Gayathri Kanth, Interim Director of the Library Department reported the 
writing contest was a popular tradition in the Library.  The goal was to foster 
creativity as well as writing skills.  The prompt for contestants' submissions 
pertained to the Barron Park donkeys.   
Liz Stewart, Senior Librarian explained that the prompt was associated with 
Palo Alto's 125th anniversary.  Judges were teacher and librarians from Palo 
Alto.  Copies of all contest submissions were located in each Library and on 
the main wall of Rinconada Library.  Ms. Stewart announced contest winners. 
Mayor Fine congratulated the winners. 
2. 
Fire Safety Month Poster Award Recognition to Palo Alto Unified School 
District Students for Excellence in Art, Creativity, and Messaging. 
Geo Blackshire, Fire Chief reported the Fire Department held a poster 
contest for elementary schools each October during Fire Prevention Week.  
The campaign motto for 2019 was "Not Every Hero Wears a Cape, Plan and 
Practice Your Escape." 
Tammy Jasso, Firefighter Engineer advised that the submissions were 
excellent, and selecting winners was difficult.  Winning submissions were 
going to be posted in the lobby outside the Council Chambers.  University 
Arts sponsored the program and provided gift certificates for winners.  She 
announced the winners.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
Mayor Fine congratulated the winners and thanked the Fire Department for 
organizing the contest. 
Closed Session 
3. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY-EXISTING LITIGATION 
Subject: Miriam Green v. City of Palo Alto  
Santa Clara County Superior Court  
Case No. 16CV300760 (One Case, as Defendant) 
Authority: Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(1). 
 
4. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY-EXISTING LITIGATION 
Subject: Andrew Valentine v. City of Palo Alto 
Santa Clara County Superior Court 
Case No. 19CV344693 (One Case, as Defendant) 
Authority: Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(1). 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:19 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 7:04 P.M. 
Mayor Fine announced no reportable action. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Ed Shikada, City Manager noted the Public Works Director had provided an 
At-Places Memorandum regarding Agenda Item Number 8.   
Oral Communications 
Jared Bernstein did not object to a Business Tax but preferred the revenues 
fund utility undergrounding, street paving, bike racks, and beat cops.  A 
Business Tax did not drive businesses out of Palo Alto.  The difference in 
businesses was not big versus small but probably retail versus everything 
else.   
Stephen Levy remarked that a large portion of individuals' discretionary 
income supported low-wage workers in Palo Alto.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
Minutes Approval 
5. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the January 21, 2020 Council Meeting. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to approve the Action Minutes for the January 21, 2020 Council 
Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to approve Agenda Item Numbers 6-10. 
6. 
Approval and Authorization for the City Manager or Designee to 
Execute Contract Number C20175147 for an Emergency Vehicle Traffic 
Signal Preemption System (PL-19000) With Trafficware as a Pilot 
Project in a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $597,500, for a Maximum 
of Four Years. 
7. 
Approval of Contract Number C20174814 With Lime Energy Services 
for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $1,820,000, and for a Term of 
Three Years, to Provide Energy Efficiency Services to Small and 
Medium Businesses. 
8. 
Approval of Amendment Number 3 to Contract Number C16161210 
With Shah Kawasaki Architects, Inc. to add a Not-to-Exceed Amount of  
$102,141 to Provide Continued Construction Administration and LEED 
Certification Services for the Fire Station 3 Replacement Project (PE-
15003), for a new Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $916,383. 
9. 
Approval of Contract Number C20177344 With Bear Electrical Services 
for the Provision of On-call Traffic Signal and Electrical Services for a 
Term of 36 Months with a Maximum Total Compensation Not-to-
Exceed $375,000. 
10. 
Appointment of 2020 Emergency Standby Council. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager announced Khoury's Market closed, and Staff was 
initiating enforcement action against the landowner.  The Council was to 
consider an update to the administrative penalty schedule the following 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
week.  Work on the Highway 101 Bike Bridge was to begin over the next few 
weeks.  Staff anticipated the County of Santa Clara Board of Supervisors 
would vote in April regarding an additional $1.5 million for the bike bridge.  
The Expanded Community Advisory Panel (XCAP) was going to meet on 
Wednesday.  The Citizens Corps Council and Emergency Services volunteers 
was going to host an awards ceremony on Thursday.  The next North 
Ventura Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP) community workshop was scheduled 
for February 27, 2020.   
Action Items 
11. 
Update and Discussion of the Planning and Development Services 
Housing Work Plan and Direction to Modify or Direct new Assignments 
Related to Housing and Other Department Assignments (Continued 
from January 21, 2020). 
Mayor Fine noted the Council designated housing as a 2020 Priority with a 
focus on affordability. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director reported Staff 
had made progress on the 2018 Housing Work Plan and some ongoing 
initiatives; however, Staff did not make progress on 2019 amendments to 
the Work Plan.  Notable 2018 amendments included two combining districts, 
the affordable housing overlay, the workforce housing overlay, streamlining 
the permit review process, parking standards and the Housing Incentive 
Program (HIP).  In 2018, the Council committed $23 million to affordable 
housing projects.  Staff made progress on three Colleagues' Memos 
regarding renter protections, safe parking and economic diversity.  Staff 
recently released three alternatives for the North Ventura Coordinated Area 
Plan (NVCAP) that demonstrated different potential housing production and 
office placement.  Staff was likely to recast the mid-range alternative as a 
lower alternative.  The Work Plan exceeded Staff resources due to the 
number of vacant positions.  The City was not on pace to achieve the 
Comprehensive Plan's goal for housing units by 2030.  Items in the Housing 
Work Plan were not going to achieve the desired number of units.  With 
respect to the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA), the number of 
low and moderate housing units was below target, but the number of 
market-rate units was on target.  Near-term and long-term production of 
housing could occur in the NVCAP and a potential Downtown Coordinated 
Area Plan.  Staff was going to continue working on housing protection and 
preservation programs.  In the near term, the Council had an opportunity to 
amend the Planned Community (PC) zoning so that the production of 
housing units, including affordable housing units, would be the public 
benefit.  The Council was able to add criteria to the PC process and maintain 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
the existing review process.  Staff was working on the Palmer Fix and 
inclusionary housing, a commercial Housing Impact Fee, accessory dwelling 
unit (ADU) regulations and studio and micro units with reduced parking 
regulations, all of which related to the Housing Priority.  If the City failed to 
fulfill its RHNA requirement for above-moderate housing by the end of the 
housing cycle, it was subject to a 10 percent threshold of streamlined 
project review for four years.  Therefore, housing production was going to 
have to focus on market-rate and affordable housing.   
Council Member Kniss requested Staff comment regarding property owners 
who had discussed housing projects with Staff. 
Mr. Lait advised that he frequently spoke with property owners who were 
interested in constructing housing in Downtown, along El Camino and Fabian 
Way, and around the NVCAP area.  Some of the concepts were quite modest 
and some were extraordinary with respect to the number of units.  For 
smaller projects, property owners were not able to comply with one or more 
development standards, typically the parking standard.  Most property 
owners felt one space per unit was sufficient.  For larger projects, property 
owners were not able to comply with the floor area standard and sometimes 
the height limit.  These concepts represented hundreds of housing units that 
were not able to be built.  A PC process provided the opportunity for a 
compromise that could provide housing at the desired inclusionary rates.   
Council Member Kniss noted the Council placed a pause on PC projects in 
2013 or 2014, and only one Affordable Housing Project had been approved 
since that time.  She asked how the Council was able to get affordable 
housing projects. 
Mr. Lait explained that the City's development standards did not align with 
the development standards needed to allow projects to proceed.  In 
Downtown, California Avenue, and El Camino, the City made significant 
concessions in terms of development standards, but land was needed for 
projects.  Some areas of the City, including areas near California Avenue, did 
not enjoy the same development incentives approved for other parts of the 
City.   
Council Member Kniss believed there would not be any affordable housing 
projects without changes in the process. 
Mr. Lait indicated there would not be another Wilton Court Project for quite a 
while because the City did not have affordable housing funds. 
Council Member Kniss asked if commercial development projects provided 
the City with affordable housing funds. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
Mr. Lait related that approximately 27,000 square feet of office development 
had been entitled and could yield about $800,000 in impact fees if building 
permits were issued for the projects.  Office production declined since caps 
were implemented. 
Council Member Kniss remarked that her long-term issue was developing 
affordable housing.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if ADUs were counted towards RHNA requirements 
and included in the table. 
Mr. Lait replied yes. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the City was legally required to provide zoning 
sites rather than to permit housing under the Housing Element. 
Mr. Lait explained that the law required the City to plan for its RHNA 
allocation.  The City was compliant with State law.  The City was not 
obligated to produce the number of housing units. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if more housing production occurred during an 
economic downturn and if there was a pattern for when commercial projects 
and housing projects were built. 
Mr. Lait advised that he had not performed a correlation analysis.  When the 
commercial office market was not as strong, more housing development 
tended to occur.  The commercial market was strong in Palo Alto for quite a 
while.  The question was the amount of incentive the City should grant at 
the peak of the market.   
Vice Mayor DuBois understood the Council needed to create incentives that 
exceed the economic return of a commercial project.   
Mr. Lait stated the only variables the City could control were development 
standards, zoning and the regulatory process.  Absent State funding or other 
resources that encouraged housing, the Council had to determine the 
threshold for incentives.  The 2018 amendments reduced development 
standards, but they were not sufficient.   
Vice Mayor DuBois requested an explanation of amortization. 
Mr. Lait explained that in the past the City had an Amortization Ordinance 
that required the abatement of nonconforming uses.  The Fry's building was 
allowed to continue as a specified mix of office, retail, and warehouse uses 
in perpetuity such that it did not have to conform to the underlying 
multifamily residential (RM-30) zoning.  The property owner had little 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
incentive to redevelop the Fry's site.  The City was not able to change the 
zoning for the site and require the property owner to conform to the new 
zoning.  The City had to determine the timeframe, whether 10, 15, or 20 
years, in which the property owner achieved the economic value of the 
property.  At the end of the timeframe, the City was able to abate the 
existing use and require the property to revert to the underlying zoning. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the City could use the amortization process to 
convert commercial property to residential. 
Mr. Lait clarified that he could not answer with respect to all areas of the 
City.  With respect to the NVCAP area, the City was able to use the 
amortization process to convert commercial property to residential. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the City needed to permit 167 housing 
units by the end of 2022. 
Mr. Lait responded yes. 
Council Member Cormack requested the period of time subject to SB 35. 
Mr. Lait reported Palo Alto was subject to SB 35 and at the 50 percent 
streamline threshold because Palo Alto did not provide the required number 
of lower-income housing units.  SB 35 became effective in 2018, and the 
State assessed Palo Alto at that time.  At that time, Palo Alto was fulfilling its 
RHNA requirements and were placed in the 50 percent streamline threshold 
rather than the 10 percent streamline threshold.  The State was going to 
reassess Palo Alto at the end of 2022 and every four years thereafter. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the City would have to fulfill RHNA 
requirements for all levels. 
Mr. Lait replied no, only the above-moderate housing requirement of 587 
units.   
Council Member Filseth requested projections for ADU production. 
Mr. Lait suspected ADU production would escalate with the new State law 
allowing a main dwelling, ADU, and junior ADU on one residential lot.  At 
some point, ADU production was expected to flatten and begin to decrease.   
Council Member Filseth inquired regarding an appropriate Floor Area Ratio 
(FAR) that could incentivize housing. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
Mr. Lait believed it would depend on the location of a project.  FAR was a 
constraint on sites that needed to overcome the existing investment in the 
property.   
Council Member Filseth asked if an increased FAR would make demolition of 
the existing use and construction of a new use easier. 
Mr. Lait answered yes.  Given the rental rates for office space, conversion to 
housing was not likely.  Commercial space was probably going to be 
converted into housing.   
Council Member Filseth asked if the FAR had to be 3 or 4. 
Mr. Lait did not know.  The FAR Downtown was 3.0 and 2.0 on California 
Avenue.  Developers wanted 2.0 FAR on El Camino, but the Council needed 
to be mindful of the transitions along El Camino.  Another constraint was lot 
consolidation.  Particularly in California Avenue, parking requirements 
combined with lot sizes made development infeasible.  Property owners were 
not willing to sell their property so that lot consolidation could occur. 
Council Member Filseth assumed Mr. Lait's comments about markets was an 
argument for flexibility that was provided by a PC. 
Mr. Lait clarified that a PC process could provide information about the 
sticking points for redevelopment of properties.  With enough information 
from the PC process, Staff may be able to draft regulations that zoned for 
the desired development. 
Council Member Filseth asked if housing was prohibited in any area of the 
City. 
Mr. Lait reported housing was not allowed in the General Manufacturing 
(GM) zone.  A property owner expressed interest in building 200 housing 
units in the GM zone. 
Council Member Kou requested clarification of SB 35 and RHNA 
requirements. 
Mr. Lait indicated SB 35, which became effective in 2018, imposed a 
streamlining provision on a city that did not meet its RHNA requirements for 
above-moderate-income housing at the midpoint and the end of the housing 
cycle.  The streamlining provision stated a city that met criteria was entitled 
to a streamlined review.  Streamlined review meant projects could be built 
to objective standards only, applications had to be processed within 60 days, 
and 10 percent of housing units had to be deed restricted to lower-income 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
units.  If a city failed to meet their requirements for low-income housing, 50 
percent of housing units had to be deed restricted to lower-income units. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the penalties the City would be 
subject to if it failed to provide the required number of low and very low 
income units. 
Mr. Lait clarified that based on current State law, the City was subject to SB 
35.  The streamlining provision applied only if a developer deed restricted 50 
percent of units because the City fulfilled their requirement for above-
moderate housing, through the streamlining provision If a developer 
proposed a housing project with 50 percent of units deed restricted, in Palo 
Alto the project would likely be an Affordable Housing Project, but an 
affordable housing provider was going to want to utilize the HIP. 
Council Member Kou asked if some parcels in the NVCAP area were zoned 
GM. 
Mr. Lait indicated a few parcels may be zoned GM. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether the zoning could be reviewed through 
the NVCAP process. 
Mr. Lait responded yes. 
Council Member Kou asked if redevelopment of housing and retail at a 
higher FAR would cause displacement. 
Mr. Lait reported State law precluded housing development that eliminated 
other housing units.  He anticipated development in Palo Alto would occur in 
commercial areas that did not have housing.   
Council Member Kou inquired about the interaction of Assembly Bill (AB) 686 
and zoning changes. 
Mr. Lait remarked that he would provide more information at a later time. 
Stephen Levy suggested the Council inquire regarding actions needed to fill 
vacant positions, bold and scalable measures, additional ways to streamline 
the review process, and funding options for low-income housing.  People 
earning incomes of 80-120 percent of the Area Median Income (AMI) were 
not able to afford market-rate housing.  Most low-income housing in Santa 
Clara County was produced through negotiated developments.   
Gail Price remarked that without specific actions and policies to promote and 
encourage multifamily housing for extremely low, low, and moderate 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
incomes and the missing middle, the conditions remained dire.  She 
concurred with improving the review and streamlining process and providing 
Staff with the needed resources to work on the Housing Work Plan.  
Modifying zoning in the East Charleston and San Antonio Corridors was 
helpful for housing.  She encouraged the Council and Staff to explore and 
incorporate green trip policies. 
Bonnie Packer urged the Council to develop a new housing overlay or 
combining district for Downtown north and south, California Avenue, El 
Camino, San Antonio, the North Ventura area and East Charleston.  A 
housing overlay zone needed to allow at least five stories of housing units, 
reduce unrealistic parking requirements, increase the FAR and streamline 
the entitlement process. 
Angie Evans concurred with providing needed resources for Staff and 
streamlining the review process.   
Sheryl Klein encouraged the Council to streamline the review process.  Palo 
Alto Housing purchased the Wilton Court property in 2013 and held it for six 
years while the project was under review.  The cost to hold the land was 
$400,000 in addition to the increase in construction costs over six years.  
Affordable housing developers needed City funding to leverage County and 
State funding. 
Pat Burt commented that the City was not meeting their low and moderate 
income requirements primarily due to funding, land competition, and land 
availability.  The Council had tentatively excluded using Business Tax 
revenues for affordable housing.  Increasing impact fees was a possibility to 
providing funding for affordable housing.  PC projects were the primary 
means for developing affordable housing. 
Waldemar Kaczmarski remarked that higher-density housing was a burden 
on those living in the area.  Low-income housing needed to be distributed 
throughout the City.   
Mark Mollineaux suggested the City consider outcomes rather than 
processes.  Land in Palo Alto had been misallocated for parking and large 
yards.   
Kelsey Banes believed dense housing created complete neighborhoods.  The 
Council needed to explore missing-middle housing, gentle density, or form-
based zoning.  The Council had to consider public parcels for affordable 
housing. 
Mary Gallagher proposed a shared-equity model for affordable housing. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
Lisa Van Dusen encouraged the Council to fill vacant positions and to 
consider a user-centered approach for streamlining processes.   
John Kelley concurred with the remarks of Mr. Levy, Ms. Price, Ms. Packer, 
Ms. Klein, Ms. Banes, and Ms. Van Dusen, and Mr. Burt's comment about 
focusing on middle-income housing.  The Council needed to think about 
goals for housing units, rents, and the mix of housing.   
Bob Moss suggested the Council threaten to rezone commercial zones to 
housing unless the property owners provide housing.  He suggested the 
Council offer a higher FAR for properties developed for housing, especially 
low-income housing.   
Mayor Fine requested Staff comment regarding Staff capacity and resources. 
Mr. Lait advised that he worked with the Human Resources (HR) Department 
to recruit for vacant positions in the long-range planning program.  Staff was 
looking to streamline and improve the review process for ADUs.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager added that the vacant positions had been difficult 
to fill.  Staff was going to explore recruitment strategies.   
Mayor Fine requested the status of PCs and the Code requirements for them. 
Mr. Lait reported the Council had adopted a policy to pause consideration of 
any PC projects with the exception that amendments to existing PCs could 
be processed.  The Council was able to reinstate consideration of PC 
applications.   
Mayor Fine appreciated the economic considerations expressed in the Staff 
Report.  The RHNA requirements were minimums rather than maximums.  
One approach to housing was a sourced method, wherein developers 
proposed a project for a site and indicated the development standards 
needed to build a specific number of units on the site.  Development 
Agreements and PCs provided 64 percent of housing over 20 years.  PC 
zoning was possibly a short-term solution to achieve some housing.  For the 
long term, zoning needed to be the right size and in scalable ways; some of 
the items in the Work Plan could be prioritized, and some could be de-
prioritized. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to: 
A. 
Reauthorize Planned Communities for residential projects and mixed-
use projects that improve the jobs to housing balance;  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
B. 
Housing will be a public benefit, and proposals should include 20 
percent inclusionary BMR housing; 
C. 
Everything is negotiable at the Staff level, but take-it-or-leave-it at the 
Council level; 
D. 
Revisit this program in 36 months; 
E. 
Direct Staff to prioritize workplan ideas according to which support our 
housing production targets, including scalable zoning changes to 
support housing; 
F. 
Direct the City Manager to return with a resourcing recommendation 
for Planning and Development Services; and  
G. 
Explore options for using public land for affordable housing projects. 
Mayor Fine remarked that Parts A-D formed an approach to relaunch PC 
zoning for housing projects.  PC zoning did not apply to commercial or 
industrial projects.  PC projects had to provide a higher level of BMR housing 
than current zoning.  Staff needed to negotiate the details of PC projects, 
and the Council would approve or deny them. 
Council Member Kniss commented that the community needed housing, and 
State regulations required housing.  Marketing, promotion, education and 
public relations were necessary to inform developers of new regulations and 
to convince the community of a new approach to housing. 
Council Member Filseth requested clarification of a mixed-use project that 
improved the jobs/housing balance.   
Mayor Fine explained that a mixed-use project should not make the 
jobs/housing balance worse.   
Council Member Filseth suggested a project should provide housing supply 
equal to the housing demand it created.   
Mr. Lait clarified that any net new jobs created through the mixed-use 
project would be equal to the number of housing units provided in the 
mixed-use project. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to include in Motion Part A, “…mixed-use projects 
that supply enough housing to cover the net, new job creation.”  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of the statement that 
housing projects in Palo Alto had a lower return on investment.   
Mr. Lait indicated the minimum amount of return on investment to the 
property owner that is acceptable.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the phrase meant housing was providing a 
lower return on investment in Palo Alto than elsewhere. 
Mr. Lait answered no. 
Council Member Cormack supported inclusionary housing at 20 percent and 
Staff prioritizing items in the Work Plan.  ADUs were important because they 
provided housing throughout the community.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, Part H, “Refer to the Finance 
Committee a proposal to consider an affordable housing tax.” 
Council Member Kou expressed displeasure that they would not review low 
and very-low housing production.  She was more willing to accept a public 
benefit of 50 percent housing and questioned the purpose of reviewing a PC 
project after 36 months.  A Business Tax needed to provide funding for 
affordable housing.   
Mayor Fine clarified that 20 percent inclusionary housing included very low 
income and extremely low income.  The 15 percent inclusionary was scaled 
different for the amount produced.  The Council was going to review the PC 
program in 36 months.   
Council Member Tanaka proposed an Amendment to the Motion for Staff to 
streamline the ADU approval process.  
Mr. Lait reported Staff was looking at ways to streamline the review process 
for ADUs. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the current rate of applications. 
Mr. Lait was going to provide the information at a later time. 
Council Member Tanaka expressed concern that 20 percent inclusionary 
housing could make a project infeasible.   
Mayor Fine explained that the current requirement was 15 percent.  The 20 
percent requirement was a challenge for developers to request exceptions to 
development standards that made the project feasible. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
Council Member Tanaka believed micro units did not require subsidies or tax 
increases and were more affordable.  Perhaps micro units were an 
alternative to the 20 percent inclusionary housing. 
Mayor Fine asked if the Code provided minimum unit requirements or unit 
densities in most RM zones. 
Mr. Lait advised that unit densities were applicable in RM zones.  The 
challenge for micro units was parking, because one space per unit was 
required.  A developer was able to propose a project with micro units and 
request no parking. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the Motion directed Staff to prioritize housing 
assignments over all other assignments. 
Mayor Fine clarified that Staff would prioritize the 25 ideas in the report. 
Vice Mayor DuBois supported prioritizing the Palmer Fix and impact fees.  
New housing projects did not mean removing existing housing.  Homeless 
prevention was separate from housing.  Setting goals and measuring them 
were key.  He thought the Council may want to consider specific housing 
overlays.  More than 300 Palo Alto units were available on Airbnb.  The main 
issue was the cost of land.  Converting commercial zoning to residential 
zoning was considered creating new land.  Perhaps Service Commercial (CS) 
zones were able to be converted to residential zones.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, Part I, “Direct Staff to 
develop metrics for tracking housing”.  
Vice Mayor DuBois proposed changing mixed-use to retail residential. 
Mayor Fine suggested a separate discussion of the issue was warranted. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney reported changing zoning on any given site or 
area was prospective.  Converting existing uses to new zoning was 
amortization. 
Vice Mayor DuBois expressed concern that the 20 percent inclusionary 
requirement was only moderate. 
Mr. Lait advised that the current standard, which was based on ownership 
housing, stated two-thirds of the required affordable units must be available 
at affordable sale prices to households earning 80-100 percent of AMI and 
one-third of the available affordable units must be available to households 
earning 100-120 percent of AMI. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois was interested in housing for all ranges. 
Mayor Fine asked if Staff could draft a scaled mechanism that provided more 
weight to the lower income levels of affordability and AMI. 
Vice Mayor DuBois clarified that 20 percent must be inclusionary, X percent 
low income, X percent very low income, and X percent moderate income. 
Mayor Fine understood inclusionary housing was based on an average mix 
over the project. 
Mr. Lait suggested the Council articulate the affordability level in which they 
were interested. 
Vice Mayor DuBois reiterated that he was interested in a range with some 
tradeoffs. 
Mr. Lait suggested requiring 5 percent for each level. 
Mayor Fine believed that the economics were going to be significantly 
different. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to include in Motion Part B, “… and have Staff 
balance that across the range of Area Median Income (AMI).” 
Vice Mayor DuBois commented that Part C tied the hands of future Councils 
and prevented the Council from considering compromises that could achieve 
approval of a project.   
Mr. Lait indicated the applicant would likely provide options related to 
development standards rather than attempt to negotiate the deal points. 
Mayor Fine believed the deal points were the development standards. 
Mr. Lait clarified that the Motion was setting Council policy.  Part C was 
directed towards the Council rather than Staff.  Review of a PC Project 
involved a prescreening before the Council, review by the Planning and 
Transportation Commission (PTC) and the Architectural Review Board (ARB), 
and then legislative approval by the Council.  A project was likely to be 
modified during the review process.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to include in Motion Part C, “Guidelines: 
everything is negotiable … .” 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois proposed 12-18 months for Part D or aligning review with 
the RHNA cycle.   
Mr. Lait reported the Housing Element would be due at the end of 2022. 
Mayor Fine noted navigating the review process would require at least a 
year.  He could agree to an update in 18 months. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to include in Motion Part D, “… with a Council 
update in 18 months.” 
Vice Mayor DuBois preferred to fund affordable housing with a Business Tax.   
Council Member Kou inquired about the FAR and lot coverage needed to 
develop 2,646 units through a PC on the Fry's site. 
Mr. Lait indicated the Housing Element anticipated a realistic yield on the 
site of 221 units based on the RM-30 zoning standards.  A developer was not 
likely to propose a PC because 221 units were allowed by right.  The project 
was going to comply with development standards. 
Council Member Kou asked if Staff or the developer would determine the 
number of units in a PC or was the number of units able to be negotiated. 
Mr. Lait explained that the negotiation pertained to the development 
standards that needed to change in order to develop the number of housing 
units the property owner was interested in constructing.   
Council Member Kou calculated 529 Below Market Rate (BMR) units were 
needed for 2,646 units.   
Mr. Lait noted the 2,646 units pertained to not one site but the project 
boundary. 
Council Member Kou requested a breakdown of the 529 BMR units into very 
low and low units. 
Mr. Lait explained that the range would be balanced across the AMI 
threshold.  Four bands were represented in the incomes.  A project would 
balance deed-restricted affordable housing within the income ranges. 
Council Member Kou asked if he would attempt to match the RHNA ranges.  
The breakdown was to match the RHNA percentages for very low, low, and 
moderate incomes. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
Mr. Lait thought that would not be an unreasonable standard. 
Council Member Kou remarked that requiring inclusionary housing and 
designating housing as the public benefit of a PC should obligate the City to 
fulfill its RHNA requirements. 
Mr. Lait indicated the Motion directs Staff to balance inclusionary housing 
across the range of AMIs, which included very low, low, moderate, and 
above moderate housing. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Council Member Kou was referring to the 
RHNA units allocated or achieved. 
Council Member Kou answered allocated.   
Council Member Cormack understood the Council was providing a broader 
range that included very low income. 
Council Member Kou asked if the Density Bonus Law went directly into 
housing or if it allowed retail as well. 
Mayor Fine related that the Density Bonus Law pertained to housing only.  
With the Density Bonus Law, a developer needed receive more density and 
more credit for going lower down the AMI spectrum.  A similar method 
applied to PCs. 
Council Member Kou wanted to ensure the City fulfilled its RHNA 
requirements for very low and low-income housing. 
Council Member Filseth requested the difference between a PC and a 
Development Agreement. 
Mr. Lait reported a PC was a zoning type, while a Development Agreement 
conveyed 
certain 
benefits 
for 
certain 
development 
standards. 
 
A 
Development Agreement was not needed for a PC. 
Ms. Stump advised that a PC was a piece of legislation, and a Development 
Agreement was a contract. 
Council Member Filseth questioned whether the PC being considered should 
be delineated with a special term. 
Ms. Stump agreed to review the PC Ordinance to determine whether the 
language needed revisions.  PC was sufficiently general to be used for the 
current purpose. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to include in Motion Part A, “Reauthorize Planned 
Communities (Planned Home Zoning, PHZ) … .” 
Council Member Filseth believed the objectives were achieving 300 housing 
units per year and retaining workers who earn 120 percent AMI and lower.  
Market-rate housing was able to be achieved with ADUs.  A few concentrated 
projects had a better chance of achieving the objectives than a broad up-
zoning of the entire City.  The community understood the difference between 
market-rate and 120 percent and less people and was amenable to paying 
some of the costs for BMR housing.  The height limit was possibly not an 
issue, but parking was an issue.  He inquired regarding maximum 
anticipated parking demand. 
Mr. Lait reported that standard was put in place for the affordable housing 
reduction to zero parking spaces.   
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by 
Council Member Kniss to: 
A. 
Reauthorize Planned Communities (Planned Home Zoning, PHZ) for 
residential projects and mixed-use projects that supply enough 
housing to cover the net, new job creation;  
B. 
Housing will be a public benefit, and proposals should include 20 
percent inclusionary BMR housing, and have Staff balance that across 
the range of Area Median Income (AMI); 
C. 
Guidelines: everything is negotiable at the Staff level, but take-it-or-
leave-it at the Council level;  
D. 
Revisit this program in 36 months, with a Council update in 18 
months;  
E. 
Direct Staff to prioritize work plan ideas according to which support 
our housing production targets, including scalable zoning changes to 
support housing; 
F. 
Direct the City Manager to return with a resourcing recommendation 
for Planning and Development Services;  
G. 
Explore options for using public land for affordable housing projects;  
H. 
Refer to the Finance Committee, a proposal to consider an affordable 
housing tax; and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
I. 
Direct Staff to develop metrics for tracking housing. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
Council took a break at 10:25 P.M. and returned at 10:31 P.M. 
12. 
Finance Committee Recommends Council Accept the Fiscal Year 2021 - 
Fiscal Year 2030 Long Range Financial Forecast and Fiscal Year 2021 
Budget Development Guidelines. 
Vice Mayor DuBois reported the Finance Committee (Committee) recognized 
labor as the City's biggest cost driver.  Scenario C illustrated the differences 
with a 1 percent wage increase.  Solid financial planning was in place for a 
baseline scenario, but many large projects were not accounted for.   
Council Member Cormack noted the cost of the Infrastructure Plan had 
increased from $125.8 million in 2014 to $280.6 million in 2019.  When 
prioritized with other projects, the Infrastructure Plan was possibly not going 
to be completed.  Property Tax revenues were the City's largest source of 
funding and were forecast with the greatest growth if turnover occurred, but 
the median price remained the same.  She requested an explanation of Sales 
Tax collection for online purchases. 
Kiely Nose, Administrative Services Director and Chief Financial Officer 
advised that the State collected sales taxes for online sales, and the 
revenues were apportioned to counties.  The revenues were disseminated to 
each jurisdiction based on its percentage of Sales Tax within the county.   
Council Member Cormack commented that fiscal sustainability was reflected 
in the Budget Development Guidelines.   
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Vice Mayor 
DuBois to accept the Fiscal Year 2021 to 2030 General Fund Long Range 
Financial Forecast (Base Case), and the City Manager’s Report 10727, 
including the Fiscal Year 2021 Annual Budget Development Guiding 
Principles. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested the next Long Range Financial Forecast 
(LRFF) include a scenario with and without things not included.  Housing 
prices had decreased by 11-12 percent since 2018.  Some residents had 
filed for tax reductions based on the decline in housing prices.  The forecast 
for property taxes seemed aggressive.   
Ms. Nose explained that Staff reviewed all factors affecting property taxes.  
When properties valued at less than $600,000 turned over, their values 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
changed significantly even though the median home price might have 
decreased over time.  Change in one factor was not necessarily going to 
alter the growth forecast.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if a decline in home prices would affect 
Documentary Transfer Tax.   
Ms. Nose indicated the Documentary Transfer Tax was based on volume and 
sale price. 
Council Member Tanaka understood the volume had decreased greatly.  He 
questioned whether the forecast was accurate given the decreases in volume 
and home prices. 
Ms. Nose explained that the Documentary Transfer Tax was one of the City's 
most volatile sources of income.  Tracking trends was difficult given the 
occurrence of outrageously high one-time property sales.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) revenues 
had been compared to local cities. 
Ms. Nose replied no. 
Council Member Tanaka reported Palo Alto's TOT revenues had increased 5-6 
percent, but the increased TOT rate generated an approximate 10.7 percent 
increase in revenues.  Mountain View's TOT revenues increased 25 percent.  
He thought Palo Alto's higher TOT Tax rate may have driven travelers to 
Mountain View.  He inquired regarding the amount of the forecast decline in 
TOT revenues.   
Ms. Nose noted TOT revenues were decreasing across the County.  Staff was 
going to adjust, if appropriate, for the Midyear Report. 
Council Member Tanaka commented that in Fiscal Year (FY) 2030 public 
safety's projected blended retirement rate would be approximately 80 
percent of payroll.   
Ms. Nose explained that based on the California Public Employees' 
Retirement System's (CalPERS) projections and the actuary's projections, in 
2023 for $1 in public safety salary, 80 cents would be contributed to 
CalPERS for both the normal cost and the Unfunded Accrued Liability (UAL).   
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether the percentage would increase or 
flatten beyond 2030. 
Ms. Nose promised to provide the information at a later time. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
Council Member Tanaka expressed concern that the cost of labor reduced 
funding for other expenses.  He requested a comparison of actual numbers 
with forecast numbers to determine the accuracy of the LRFF. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the accuracy of the forecast was expected 
to vary dramatically over the course of the ten-year period. 
Ms. Nose replied yes. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed that a comparison of forecast numbers with 
budget numbers would be more appropriate. 
Council Member Cormack indicated forecast and actual numbers for Property 
Tax revenues were available. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager clarified that the LRFF was a planning tool based 
on the revenues and expenses of the budget.  The LRFF was not intended to 
be predictive.   
AMENDMENT: Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council 
Member XX to direct Staff look at the actuals of the long-range financial 
forecast. 
AMENDMENT FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
Council Member Tanaka requested Staff prepare a table showing the change 
in the LRFF from the prior year.  He wanted a comparison of the prior year's 
LRFF with the current year's LRFF.   
Council Member Cormack requested the intent of such a comparison. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to understand the changes and adjustments 
made to the LRFF. 
Council Member Cormack felt reconciling the expenses would be quite 
difficult. 
Council Member Tanaka requested Staff provide spreadsheets of the 2019 
and 2020 LRFFs. 
Mayor Fine requested Staff provide the Council with the expense and 
revenue table in an Excel spreadsheet for 2019 and 2020, if available. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney reported Staff could not provide a spreadsheet 
because of data security issues and broader implications. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/03/2020 
Mr. Shikada added that Staff was not prepared to respond to the request. 
Council Member Filseth found CalPERS' reports to be confusing and 
commented that the debt repayment component alone was complicated.  He 
wanted to see the dollar value of the normal cost each year and the debt 
with an amortization schedule.   
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Vice Mayor DuBois announced the Gunn High School Choir would perform an 
original musical on February 11 and 12, 2020.   
Council Member Cormack attended the joint Fire Academy graduation the 
prior week.  One of Palo Alto's graduates had received the Meritorious 
Conduct Award prior to her graduation. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:01 P.M. 
 
