CITY COUNCIL ANNUAL RETREAT 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 21 
Special Meeting 
February 1, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date at Mitchell Park 
Community Center, El Palo Alto Room, 3700 Middlefield Road, Palo Alto at 
9:09 A.M. 
Present:  
Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Mayor Fine reviewed 2019 Priorities and progress made on Affordable Housing 
and a Business Tax.  
Oral Communications  
Stephen Levy agreed with Council direction regarding the Business Tax 
Measure.  He suggested the Council consider a low, flat-rate tax on small 
businesses rather than an exemption for them.  The Council needed to direct 
Staff to study leakage. 
Helen Young asked the Council to continue emphasizing gender equality in all 
phases of its work and to direct the Policy and Services Committee to work on 
a policy regarding the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). 
Cherrill Spencer noted Staff had not presented an Ordinance endorsing 
CEDAW to the Policy and Services Committee in the past 16 months.  She 
requested the Council allocate Staff resources to generate a report for such 
an Ordinance. 
Darlene Yaplee appreciated the Council's letter to San Francisco International 
Airport (SFO) regarding noise monitors.  In some instances, the City of Palo 
Alto had to represent itself and to engage actively in discussions. 
Mary-Jo Fremont spoke regarding aircraft noise and emissions and their 
effects on people.   
Mark Shull indicated he was researching and documenting the dramatic shift 
in airplane traffic over Palo Alto and Palo Alto's lack of a response over the 
past 25 years. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Mila Zelkha hoped the Council considered the report of streetlight data as a 
tool to guide and evaluate Transportation Demand Management (TDM) 
programs.   
Bob Moss believed most Staff Reports did not detail the impacts of commercial 
and residential development.  Living near transit did not mean people were 
making use of transit.  Office development needed to be capped Citywide.  The 
jobs/housing imbalance had not changed in the last 40 years. 
David Coale felt the Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) should be 
reviewed and updated immediately. 
Kerry Yarkin suggested the Council send letters to the Norman Y. Mineta San 
Jose International Airport in addition to SFO.  The City needed a different 
lobbyist.   
Jennifer Landesmann requested the City continue the publication of Palo Alto 
Matters formerly authored by Jennifer Hetterly.  Hopefully, the City's 
enhanced communications would complement Council actions to build trust in 
the community and to engage residents. 
Prameela Barthlomeusz noted the Santa Clara County Democratic Party had 
prioritized CEDAW to ensure all cities in Santa Clara County addressed 
CEDAW.   
Pat Burt remarked that enabling new companies and business support services 
to survive and thrive in Palo Alto was critical to the continual evolution of 
companies.  The notion that a Business Tax of $0.20 per square foot was going 
to drive companies from the City was fiction.   
Overview of the Day and Retreat Orientation. 
1. 
City Manager Report and City Council Discussion on Accomplishments 
Addressing Council Priorities, Continuing Multi-year Efforts, and 
Discussion and Selection of 2020 Council Priorities. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager reported Staff prepared work plans for each of the 
Council's 2019 Priorities.  2019 Council Priorities were Grade Separation, Fiscal 
Sustainability, Climate Change, and Transportation and Traffic.   
Meghan Horrigan-Taylor, Chief Communications Officer advised that an online 
survey opened in December and closed on January 24, 2020.  Five hundred 
four people visited the form, and 347 priority responses and 11 emails were 
submitted.  General themes from survey comments included: create more 
housing overall and support housing for all income levels; reduce traffic, make 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
streets safer, and synchronize traffic signals; make biking easier and safer; 
address rail grade separations and crossing issues; support climate change, 
sustainability, and resiliency; focus on fiscal sustainability; implement a plan 
for Cubberley; reduce airplane noise; and focus on undergrounding utilities.   
Council Member Kniss felt 347 responses represented a small percentage of 
Palo Alto's population.  She inquired regarding possible reasons for the small 
number of responses. 
Ms. Horrigan-Taylor noted the number of comments increased from 2018 to 
2019.  Staff utilized all methods of communication to publicize the survey.   
Gail Price, Palo Alto Forward indicated one Council Priority needed to be 
housing.  The lack of sufficient housing supply was urgent.  Encouraging new, 
compact infill housing was going to spur economic growth, reduce monthly 
household costs and cut greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.   
Stephen Levy referred to a letter from the League of Women Voters suggesting 
the Council prioritize the production of low and moderate-income housing.  He 
urged the Council to reinstate housing as a Priority. 
Mila Zelkha, Manzanita Works announced Manzanita Transit was an employer-
led transit cooperative in the mid-Peninsula subregion designed to close gaps 
in public transportation.  She recommended the Council consider public-
private sponsorship of public art for bus shelters, benches, and seats and an 
extension of the subscription for streetlight data. 
Jean Wilcox inquired about the possibility of rezoning vacant commercial 
buildings along East Meadow Circle, East Meadow Drive, and Fabian Way to 
residential.   
Jennifer Landesmann requested the Council Priorities include climate change 
and airplane noise and emissions.   
Penny Ellson believed the Council should consider Priorities in the categories 
of transportation, housing and land use, and budget and finance, all within a 
sustainability context.  Bicycle boulevard projects had languished for two 
decades.   
Elaine Uang concurred with reinstating housing as a Priority in 2020.  Climate 
change needed to continue as a Priority.   
Heidi Owens remarked regarding discrimination against women and the 
implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Winter 
Dellenbach 
suggested 
Council 
Priorities 
of 
climate 
change, 
transportation and housing.  A Housing Priority had to be refined and funded.  
The City needed truly affordable housing rather than market-rate housing.   
Terry Holzemer supported Priorities of a Business Tax and Below-Market-Rate 
(BMR) housing. 
Pat Burt, Citizens for Transportation and Affordable Housing Solutions 
remarked that a Business Tax was needed to fund transportation and housing 
Priorities.   
David Coale stated climate change should be the overarching Priority for 2020.   
Karen Holman concurred with Ms. Dellenbach's comments regarding housing 
and Mr. Burt's comments regarding a Business Tax.  For $40 million, the City 
was able to develop a redundant power source.   
Suzanne Keehn recommended the Council increase the proposed Business Tax 
rate.  She thought priorities could be airplane noise and water. 
Ross Mayfield spoke regarding airplane noise and the Quiet Nights proposal.   
Hamilton Hitchings recommended the Council explore rezoning office to 
housing as part of a housing Priority.  A Business Tax was able to fund 
transportation initiatives, which supported commuters, existing businesses 
and housing growth.   
Sheryl Klein, Palo Alto Housing Board Chair commented that housing was 
needed for all income ranges.  A greater supply of housing was able to reduce 
sale prices.   
Bob Moss indicated the community should think about a local bus system.  He 
supported a Business Tax set at a rate that was competitive with surrounding 
cities.  More focus needed to be placed on sea level rise.  The Council needed 
to eliminate the In-Lieu Housing Fee and require developers to build affordable 
housing. 
Kelsey Banes urged the Council to prioritize housing.  More housing was 
needed for all income levels.   
Mary Sylvester agreed that housing solutions needed to be creative, and 
housing should be considered for all neighborhoods.  The Council should 
rezone land for housing.  Business Tax revenues should support BMR housing. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Karen Porter expressed disappointment with the Council's unwillingness to file 
a lawsuit against the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).  Aircraft emissions 
and noise were serious.   
Tony Klein encouraged the Council to include housing, transportation and 
climate change as Priorities for 2020. 
Council took a break at 10:53 A.M. and returned at 11:13 A.M. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed the Council consider more specific goals so 
that progress could be measured.   
Council Member Filseth noted Council Priorities had been fairly consistent over 
the past few years.  Grade separations would require a large investment from 
the Council. 
Council Member Kniss noted the need for housing, both market-rate and Below 
Market Rate (BMR) housing.  She supported Priorities of housing, 
transportation including grade separations, bike paths, and the shuttle 
program, and sustainability of all kinds.   
Mayor Fine agreed that specific goals would be helpful.  He challenged the 
Council to think about making the Priorities measurable and attainable.  He 
highlighted accomplishments for the 2019 Priorities.  He concurred with the 
Priorities of housing, mobility and sustainability.  Grade separations were 
possibly a fourth Priority.   
Vice Mayor DuBois remarked that the Priorities should be clear and concurred 
with Priorities of housing, transportation and sustainability.  Grade separation 
needed to be a Priority because of the amount of time they required.   
Council Member Cormack supported climate change as a Priority and 
suggested the Council may want to form a board or commission that focused 
on climate change, sustainability and the environment.  She did not believe 
selecting a preferred alternative for grade separation by the end of 2020 was 
feasible.  Objectives rather than actions for transportation were acceptable.  
Fiscal sustainability was a value rather than a Priority.  Based on her 
experiences on the Finance Committee, she did not believe fiscal sustainability 
should be a Priority for 2020.  Housing needed to be a Priority and Cubberley 
remained a priority. 
Council Member Kou supported transportation and traffic congestion as a 
Priority.  She liked the idea of a citizen’s advisory commission reviewing goals 
and deliverables for traffic congestion and transportation.  More services 
focused in neighborhoods were needed so that residents did not have to drive 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
to the services.  She hoped the City would hire an economic development 
director and conduct a Needs Analysis.  She supported housing as a Priority if 
it was BMR housing and she supported a Business Tax. 
Mayor Fine agreed that the City needed to focus on economic development, 
but it may not be a Priority.  The Infrastructure Plan was underway but needed 
management.   
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss, to select 
the following Priorities for 2020:  
A.  
Housing; 
B. 
Sustainability; and  
C. 
Mobility. 
Mayor Fine asked if Staff differentiated between transportation and mobility. 
Mr. Shikada indicated Staff did not distinguish between the two and would 
provide a range of activities that reflected a multimodal perspective. 
Mayor Fine explained that mobility concerned the movement of goods, 
services and people.  He noted that sustainability could be climate change.  
Housing was an overriding issue in the community. 
Council Member Kniss stated everyone needed housing.  Sustainability 
covered a multitude of issues.  Mobility referred to not only movement around 
the City but the mechanics of movement.   
Vice Mayor DuBois supported the Motion.  The Council was well served by Staff 
categorizing Agenda items as related to Affordable Housing or Market-Rate 
Housing.  He inquired about the government's role in Market-Rate Housing.  
The Council needed to discuss goals and metrics for housing.  Goals for 
mobility needed to be specific.  The City had to lobby the Santa Clara Valley 
Transportation Authority (VTA) and regional transportation agencies to 
consider commuting as a priority.  The Council needed to develop goals for 
the shuttle program and reconsider policies for traffic flow.  He liked the idea 
of a citizen commission on sustainability.  Secondary priorities he suggested 
could be transparency, campaign finance limits and fiber to the home. 
Council Member Cormack did not believe the average person understood the 
meaning of sustainability.  The Priorities needed to have some definition.   
Council Member Filseth felt sustainability was a broad term but acceptable.  
He hoped a Priority for mobility referenced traffic because the community 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
referred to traffic problems.  The Council needed to execute on the 
Comprehensive Plan goal of 300 housing units per year.  A Priority for housing 
needed to focus on housing for low and mid-income workers.   
Council Member Tanaka proposed the Council draft one or two metrics for 
each Priority. 
Mayor Fine agreed with developing metrics or brief descriptions for each 
Priority. 
Council Member Tanaka commented that micro units were affordable and were 
also considered Market-Rate Housing.   
Council Member Kou concurred with Council Member Filseth's comments and 
hoped the Priorities included metrics and deliverables.   
Mayor Fine indicated mobility included traffic congestion, but transportation 
was acceptable.  While sustainability was a government term, City Staff and 
the community understood it.  Housing included market-rate and affordable 
housing.  In thinking about affordable housing, i.e., dedicated BMR housing, 
the Council needed to consider solutions that were scalable and that utilized 
funding from other entities.  The focus within housing was affordable housing.  
Staff included metrics and goals in the work plans for Council Priorities. 
Council Member Filseth stated small units could provide affordable housing.  
He proposed Part A of the Motion include "with special emphasis on 
affordability." 
Council Member Kniss advised that a discussion of affordable housing may 
have to include housing for the homeless population in order to obtain outside 
funding.  If affordable housing included subsidized housing, she was able to 
accept the proposed language. 
Mayor Fine concurred with Council Member Kniss' comments.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion Part A, “with special emphasis 
on affordability.” 
Council Member Tanaka explained that micro units were inherently affordable 
without government subsidies and could serve different populations.   
Mayor Fine suggested unit size pertained to mechanics rather than goals.   
Council Member Kniss felt small units were inherent in affordability. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion Part B, “in the context of the 
changing climate” and add to the Motion Part C, “improving mobility for all.” 
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka to add “fiscal” as a subcategory to the Motion Part B, “sustainability.”  
AMENDMENT FAILED:  2-5 Kou, Tanaka yes 
Council Member Filseth stated small units were a mechanism for affordable 
housing. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to select the following priorities for 2020:  
A. 
Housing, with special emphasis on affordability; 
B. 
Sustainability, in the context of the changing climate; and  
C. 
Improving mobility for all. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
Council took a break at 12:27 P.M. and returned at 1:00 P.M. 
2. 
Policy and Services Committee Recommends Council Review and 
Discuss the Council's Procedures and Protocols Handbook.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager noted the Policy and Services Committee (P&S) 
recommended Council review of specific items.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney reported P&S reviewed each Page of the Council 
Procedures and Protocols Handbook (Handbook) in December, 2019.  The 
redline version of the Handbook reflected revisions that updated the rules as 
to current practices and legal requirements.  The Council was subject to adopt 
the redline version as an initial update of the Handbook.  The Staff Report 
summarized policy issues for Council discussion.   
Karen Holman noted the Handbook was last amended in 2013; therefore, 
some topics were outmoded.  The number of Council Members required to 
remove an item from the Consent Calendar needed to be two.  The dollar 
amount of items placed on the Consent Calendar had to be limited.  The 
language regarding providing Motions to the City Clerk prior to the meeting 
needed to be prior to or during the meeting.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Winter Dellenbach wanted the Handbook to state a length of time for 
individuals to address the Council during public comments, the role of Council 
liaisons and a process for removal of members serving on boards and 
commissions. 
Jeff Hoel agreed that two Council Members should be allowed to remove an 
item from the Consent Calendar.  The Council needed to clarify the length of 
time prior to a Special Meeting for release of the Council Packet and the day 
of the week for actions to occur if a meeting was not held on Monday. 
Mayor Fine requested Staff respond to questions from the public. 
Ms. Stump related that the Handbook stated individuals may address the 
Council for up to three minutes depending on the number of speakers and 
Agenda Items.  The language regarding provision of the Packet was general, 
despite the heading.  There was no legal requirement for materials to be 
provided 11 days prior to a meeting.   
Council Member Kniss noted P&S agreed to all changes in the redline version. 
Council Member Cormack requested a ten minute break rather than a five 
minute break.  She requested a definition of a high-dollar-value item. 
Ms. Stump explained that the City Manager, department Staff and the Mayor 
discussed whether an item presented a significant policy issue or was 
controversial such that it needed to be changed as Action Item on the Agenda.  
The dollar amount was a factor in that determination.   
Council Member Cormack felt the description was a concern.  She inquired 
whether announcements about regional meetings and the like were 
appropriate. 
Ms. Stump answered yes. 
Council Member Kou asked if the third sentence of Number 1.3 should state 
"in the City's, region's and State's jurisdiction." 
Ms. Stump related that the language referred to any topic within the City 
Council's purview, and the Council's purview was sufficiently broad to cover 
almost any topic. 
Council Member Kou requested references to Code sections include links.  The 
section on decorum needed to contain links to Municipal Code Sections 
2.04.12 and 2.04.130.  Part D on Page 6 needed to cite the State law and 
provide a link to it.  She inquired whether the policy regarding Staff Reports 
was written. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Ms. Stump clarified that the policy for the Clerk to provide Staff Reports 11 
days prior to the meeting was not written.   
Council Member Kou inquired regarding Council Members explaining their no 
votes on the Consent Calendar. 
Ms. Stump reported P&S had suggested the Council discuss the topic. 
Council Member Kou asked about the $25,000 limit for Agenda Items. 
Ms. Stump explained that the $25,000 limit pertained to the City Manager's 
authority or a tier for competitive solicitation. 
Council Member Kou recalled that Part N on Page 13 was deleted from the 
Handbook that P&S reviewed. 
Ms. Stump clarified that the language was contained in the Handbook.  The 
Council was able to delete it. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether Rosenberg's Rules should be added to 
Part U on Page 16. 
Ms. Stump indicated Part U could reference Rosenberg's Rules. 
Council Member Kou requested the table on Page 20 include the number of 
Council Members for two-thirds and four-fifths votes. 
Ms. Stump agreed to do so. 
Council Member Kou asked if "not participating" was a recusal. 
Ms. Stump reported she would prepare at some point a guide for how vote 
counts were affected by absences, super majorities, recusals and abstentions. 
Council Member Kou noted “Planned Community” was stricken in some 
instances. 
Ms. Stump advised that all should be stricken.  Any quasi-judicial Agenda Item 
was to follow additional procedural requirements, whether it was listed in the 
Handbook. 
Council Member Kou requested the location of the policy and procedure for 
responding to customer complaints stated in Part I on Page 33. 
Mr. Shikada agreed to investigate the policy. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Council Member Kou requested a link to the policy.  She inquired whether Vice 
Mayor DuBois and Council Member Cormack would discuss Section 2.4 on 
Pages 34 and 35. 
Vice Mayor DuBois clarified that Section 2.4 related to Council Member 
interaction. 
Ms. Stump recalled that the Council's direction to P&S was to omit Section 
2.4. 
Council Member Kou requested the rationale for Section 4 addressing only 
P&S. 
Ms. Stump did not know.  The Council was able to add roles for the Finance 
Committee and Council Appointed Officers Committee. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the meaning of eligible activates in 
out-of-town conferences and meetings. 
Ms. Stump suggested the correct word be “activities.” 
Council Member Kou asked if the travel policy should state lowest fare 
available. 
Monique LeConge Ziesenhenne, Assistant City Manager was going to ensure 
the Travel Policy aligned with Staff Travel Policies. 
Council Member Kou noted incorrect numbering on Page 46 and the lack of 
information for footnotes. 
Ms. Stump indicated the footnotes were not accurate. 
MOTION: Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss 
to: 
A. 
Approve the initial round of edits to the Council Procedures and Protocols 
(CPP) Handbook which were intended to make legally required changes, 
delete obsolete provisions, and update sections to reflect current 
practices, with the following changes:   
i. 
Allow a 10-minute break;  
ii. 
Add Links to Government and Municipal Code Sections, Reports, 
and Supporting Documents; 
iii. 
Add reference to Rosenberg’s Rules and provide a link; 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
iv. 
Ensure “Planned Community” is deleted from document; 
v. 
Review reference to “Policy and Procedure for Responding to 
Customer Complaints;” 
vi. 
7.2. A. change “activates” to “activities;” and 
vii. 
Section 7.9 is missing. 
Council Member Kniss expressed concern that a Council Member would 
prepare a Motion prior to hearing public comment. 
Vice Mayor DuBois felt the Staff Report language on Pages 5 and 6 eliminated 
the purpose of allowing the public time to respond to Agenda Items. 
Ms. Stump explained that the prior language provided an exception to State 
law requiring information be published on Thursday prior to a Monday 
meeting.  Currently, information provided to the Council and the public with 
less than 11 days prior to the meeting was the exception. 
Vice Mayor DuBois felt an Agenda Item pertaining to large projects or policy 
considerations should be continued if the Staff Report was not available 11 
days prior to the meeting. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the language meant a large item for which a 
Staff Report was not available 11 days prior to the meeting could not be heard. 
Ms. Stump recommended the language not reflect that.  The City Manager 
and Mayor were able to decide whether to continue an item prior to the 
meeting and the Council was able to decide during the meeting. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion “Draft a sentence which would 
state, when reports are not ready 11 days in advance for major complex 
projects and policies, the City Manager and Mayor would have the discretion 
to move the item to a later date” (New Part A. viii.). 
Mayor Fine added that the Council could continue an item during Agenda 
Changes, Additions and Deletions. 
Vice Mayor DuBois supported the proposed changes to remote attendance.  
He requested comment regarding making Council Members' Expense Reports 
public.  He questioned whether the definition of Special Meeting should be 
revised.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Ms. Stump advised that the definition of Special Meeting was provided in State 
law.  A Special Meeting was able to be called with 24 hours' notice, but that 
had not occurred during her tenure with the City.  The language about 
providing Staff Reports 11 days prior to a meeting was able to be moved to 
its own section. 
Beth Minor, City Clerk clarified that Special Meetings typically followed the 
Agenda format of a Regular Meeting. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion “Ensure the 11-day reporting 
requirement would have its own section in the Procedures and Protocols” (New 
Part A. ix.).  
Mayor Fine reviewed requested changes and thought the Council may want to 
follow up regarding Rosenberg Rules and the effects of absences and recusals 
on vote counts. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by 
Council Member Kniss to: 
A. 
Approve the initial round of edits to the Council Procedures and Protocols 
(CPP) Handbook which were intended to make legally required changes, 
delete obsolete provisions, and update section to reflect current 
practices, with the following changes:   
i. 
Allow a 10-minute break;  
ii. 
Add Links to Government and Municipal Code Sections, Reports, 
and Supporting Documents; 
iii. 
Add reference to Rosenberg’s Rules and provide a link; 
iv. 
Ensure “Planned Community” is deleted from document; 
v. 
Review reference to “Policy and Procedure for Responding to 
Customer Complaints;” 
vi. 
7.2. A. change “activates” to “activities;” 
vii. 
Section 7.9 is missing; 
viii. 
Draft a sentence which would state, when reports are not ready 
11 days in advance for major complex projects and policies, the 
City Manager and Mayor would have the discretion to move the 
item to a later date; and  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
ix. 
Ensure the 11-day reporting requirement would have its own 
section in the Procedures and Protocols.  
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested the Mayor conduct a straw poll regarding 
potential agreement on items for discussion. 
Council Member Cormack advised that she had a suggestion that was not on 
the list. 
Council Member Tanaka did not believe referring the items to P&S would be 
productive because P&S had recommended Council discussion of the items. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth to 
approve the proposed changes to Section 2.4.B, Telephonic Attendance of 
Council Members at Council Meetings.  
Mayor Fine hoped Staff could devise a procedure for posting an Agenda at a 
remote location.  Council Members had not abused the policy. 
Council Member Filseth agreed that the proposed policy was reasonable. 
Council Member Tanaka felt the limit on telephonic appearances was arbitrary.  
Participation by conference call was better than an absence. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by 
Council Member Kniss to change Section 2.4.B, Telephonic Attendance of 
Council Members at Council Meetings, to align with State law which would 
change the remote posting of meeting notice to 72 hours in advance for a 
Regular Meeting and 24 hours in advance for a Special Meeting.  
Council Member Tanaka preferred to align noticing requirements for remote 
locations with State law rather than local policy.   
Council Member Cormack was not supporting the Substitute Motion.  
Telephonic participation needed to be discouraged unless and until the 
telephone system was upgraded.  The limit on telephone appearances needed 
to be retained. 
Council Member Kniss felt posting a notice 72 hours in advance at a remote 
location was onerous. 
Ms. Stump reported the 72-hour notice was required legally.  A Council 
Member was not able to participate unless an Agenda had been posted 
continuously in the remote location for 72 hours prior to a Regular Meeting. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Council Member Kniss questioned whether the law allowing telephonic 
participation with 72 hours' notice was appropriate.  Council Member 
participation in meetings was important and notice often could not be posted 
72 hours in advance. 
Ms. Stump suggested the Council raise the issue with the City's lobbyist. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED:  2-5 Kniss, Tanaka yes 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change the word “actively” to “strongly.”  
Council Member Tanaka proposed aligning the City's requirements with State 
requirements.   
Ms. Stump reported the State law indicated a local body may allow telephonic 
participation.  There was no maximum and no minimum number of telephonic 
meetings. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested the remaining provisions of Section 2.4.B 
align with State law. 
Mayor Fine explained that the City could impose different requirements. 
Ms. Stump advised that the provision for notice to the City Clerk was not 
contained in State law and was not a higher standard. 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded 
by Council Member Filseth to approve the proposed changes to Section 2.4.B, 
Telephonic Attendance of Council Members at Council Meetings and: 
A. 
The requirement related to remote posting of meeting notice shall align 
with State law which would require notice 72 hours in advance for a 
Regular Meeting, and 24 hours in advance for a Special Meeting;  
B. 
Change the word “actively” to “strongly.” 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
MOTION: Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to approve 
the proposed changes to Section 2.4.H, Consent Calendar. 
Council Member Filseth assumed the rationale for a Council Member speaking 
prior to the vote was to persuade other Council Members to vote differently.  
That sounded like a discussion, which defeated the purpose of a Consent 
Calendar. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Mayor Fine concurred with Council Member Filseth's remarks.   
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
MOTION: Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to 
change Section 2.4.J, Council Requests to Remove Item, to state “Two Council 
Members may request that an item be removed from the Consent Calendar…” 
Vice Mayor DuBois felt the main issue was Council Members trusting one 
another.  Council Members learned that removing items from the Consent 
Calendar was not productive.   
Council Member Kniss indicated she would not support the Motion because the 
number of items removed from the Consent Calendar would increase. 
Council Member Filseth concurred with Council Member Kniss.  The Council's 
capacity to hear Agenda Items was limited, and the City Manager and Mayor 
were trusted to review items for the Consent Calendar. 
Mayor Fine agreed that three Council Members was the correct number.  Over 
the past year, the Council removed few items from the Consent Calendar.  The 
inability to remove an item had not harmed the City. 
Council Member Cormack agreed with Council Member Filseth's comments 
about trust.   
MOTION FAILED:  3-4 Cormack, Filseth, Fine and Kniss no 
Mayor Fine expressed interest in seeing the range of Consent Calendar Items 
for the past two years and their dollar amounts. 
Vice Mayor DuBois indicated the criteria for Consent Calendar Items were not 
clearly defined.  A dollar amount was not an appropriate criterion. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor DuBois, seconded by Council Member XX to direct Policy 
and Services Committee to review possible changes to Section 2.4.L, Consent 
Calendar Categories and whether contracts above a given dollar threshold 
should be placed on the Action Agenda.  
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
Council Member Tanaka reported P&S was not able to reach a consensus in 
December, 2019 so referring it to P&S was not logical. 
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois 
to direct the Finance Committee to come up with proposed thresholds for 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Council to consider related to Section 2.4.L, Consent Calendar Categories, 
which determines the eligibility for items to be placed on the Consent 
Calendar. 
Vice Mayor DuBois felt a threshold was appropriate. 
Council Member Kou asked if most contracts placed on the Consent Calendar 
had already been approved in another City process. 
Mr. Shikada advised that usually the Council had approved contracts through 
the budgeting process. 
Council Member Kou asked if a change order or contract extension would be 
presented as an Action Item. 
Mr. Shikada indicated it could be placed on the Consent Calendar or as an 
Action Item. 
Ms. Stump clarified that an item the Council had not previously considered in 
some process should be presented as an Action Item. 
Council Member Cormack did not understand the issue because she had 
reviewed every Consent Calendar Item presented during her time on the 
Council.  A revision was not necessary. 
Mayor Fine related that the issue was a political one.  The Council preferred 
not to vote on expensive items without a discussion.   
Council Member Kniss expressed concern regarding the public perception of 
high-dollar Consent Calendar Items and preferred some type of threshold. 
Council Member Filseth concurred with Council Member Cormack's comments.  
He did not perceive a problem with the City Manager's and Mayor's decisions 
over the past few years.  It was possible that the threshold could be too low, 
and this could increase the number of Action Items.   
Council Member Tanaka noted the recent polling results regarding the public 
perception of fiscal waste.  With the Council considering a Business Tax, the 
public needed to have confidence in the City's use of funds.   
Vice Mayor DuBois believed there had been issues in the past.  The Council 
needed to balance oversight, efficiency and public trust.   
Council Member Filseth suggested imposing a soft spending cap through 
Council discussion of items was not an efficient use of Council time. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
MOTION PASSED:  4-3 Cormack, Filseth, Fine no 
Council Member Kniss remarked that beginning with a Motion was expedient 
and would not prohibit a robust discussion. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka to change Section 2.4.V., Motions, to include a procedure that Council 
should begin work on an Action Item with a Motion, followed by public 
comment and Council discussion and action.  
Council Member Filseth believed the range of complex issues presented to the 
Council sometimes required extensive questioning.  The Mayor was able to 
implement this procedure at his or her discretion.  Mandating the procedure 
was overly restrictive. 
Mayor Fine agreed with Council Member Filseth.   
Council Member Cormack added that public comment was an important 
component of Council discussion and sometimes provided information that 
shaped Motions.  Council Members were more efficient by limiting themselves 
to questions prior to public comment. 
Council Member Kou indicated beginning with a Motion limited discussion 
points.  The Council needed to consider public comments prior to offering a 
Motion. 
MOTION FAILED:  2-5 Kniss, Tanaka yes 
Mayor Fine explained the One Hour Rule.   
Ms. Stump clarified that if a Council Member inquiry required more than an 
hour of Staff work, it needed to be presented to the Council as a discussion of 
direction to Staff. 
Mr. Shikada added that the relevance of the issue varied widely among Council 
Members.  Having a boundary provided value in leveling expectations from 
individual Council Members. 
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member Kou 
to retain Section 2.3.H, “Respect the ‘One Hour’ Rule for Staff Work,” as 
written.  
Council Member Filseth advised that directing Staff resources in a significant 
way was the jurisdiction of the Council rather than an individual Council 
Member. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Mayor Fine requested clarification of one hour per item, one hour per question, 
or one hour per week. 
Ms. Stump indicated one topic.  A Council Member rarely had more than a 
handful of topics pending with Staff at any one time. 
Mayor Fine asked if the current rule was effective. 
Ms. Stump related that the rule was working well.   
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Tanaka noted the inability to submit questions by the deadline 
when an Agenda had not yet been published.   
Mr. Shikada reported Staff had accommodated Council questions when there 
was a holiday or a late Packet. 
Mayor Fine indicated Council should submit their questions if the Packet or an 
Agenda Item was provided after the deadline.  Staff was able to respond if at 
all possible. 
Mr. Shikada added that he would communicate the flexibility. 
Council Member Kniss suggested referral of the Policy for Travel and 
Miscellaneous Expense Reimbursement to the Finance Committee to be woven 
into the Budget for the current Fiscal Year (FY).  Currently, $25,000 had been 
allocated for Council travel, but there was no policy.  Some cities allocated a 
dollar amount to each Council Member. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka to refer Section 7, City Council and Boards and Commissions Policy for 
Travel and Miscellaneous Expense Reimbursement, to the Finance Committee 
for review and discussion.  
Council Member Tanaka believed allocating funds to each Council Member 
would provide them with flexibility and equity and would be similar to 
surrounding cities' policies.   
Council Member Filseth recalled Council Member Tanaka's earlier comment 
regarding public perception of fiscal waste.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council 
Member Cormack to refer to the Policy and Services Committee for review and 
discussion Council Procedures and Protocols, Section 7, City Council and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Boards and Commissions Policy for Travel and Miscellaneous Expense 
Reimbursement.   
Council Member Cormack noted the small amount of budgeted funds.  Perhaps 
the new P&S was able to reach consensus. 
Vice Mayor DuBois had not observed an issue in the past.  The current policy 
allowed flexibility for some Council Members to travel more than others.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE SUBSTITUTE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT 
OF THE MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Substitute Motion “Consider 
whether to make City Council travel expense reports available to the public.” 
Mayor Fine had not heard of a Council Member being denied funds because 
other Council Members had utilized the budgeted amount.  The Mayor's 
authorization of travel applied to out-of-State travel only.   
Council Member Kniss preferred the policy include some guidelines.  She 
thought the Finance Committee should review the policy to determine its 
impact on the City Budget. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION AS AMENDED: Council Member Filseth moved, 
seconded by Council Member Cormack to refer the following to the Policy and 
Services Committee for review and discussion: 
A. 
Council Procedures and Protocols, Section 7, City Council and Boards 
and Commissions Policy for Travel and Miscellaneous Expense 
Reimbursement; and  
B. 
Consider whether to make City Council travel expense reports available 
to the public. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member XX 
to refer to Policy and Services Committee the possible establishment of a 
protocol for the use of electronic devices during a public meeting.  
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
Mayor Fine encouraged Council Members to be aware of their use of electronic 
devices during Council meetings. 
Council Member Kou advised that she monitored her electronic device during 
meetings for communications from ill family members. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting, Annual Retreat 
Final Minutes:  02/01/2020 
Council Member Cormack indicated the City of Los Altos provided an exception 
for that purpose. 
Council Member Tanaka felt all expense reports should be public documents. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 2:44 P.M. 
 
