CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 21 
Special Meeting 
May 18, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date by virtual 
teleconference at 5:03 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Closed Session 
A. 
CONFERENCE WITH LABOR NEGOTIATORS 
City Designated Representatives: City Manager and his Designees 
Pursuant to Merit System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada, Rumi 
Portillo, Molly Stump, Monique LeConge Ziesenhenne, Nick Raisch,  
Kiely Nose, Gina Roccanova) 
Employee Organizations: Utilities Management and Professional 
Association of Palo Alto (UMPAPA); Service Employees International 
Union, (SEIU) Local 521; Service Employees International Union, 
(SEIU) Local 521, Hourly Unit; Palo Alto Police Officers Association 
(PAPOA); Palo Alto Fire Chiefs’ Association (FCA) and Employee 
Organization: International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF), Local 
1319; Palo Alto Police Manager’s Association (PAPMA) 
Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6(a) 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Jeremy Erman hoped the negotiators would consider the big picture and 
work together to make the City the best it could be.   
Council went into Closed Session at 5:07 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 7:32 P.M. 
Mayor Fine announced no reportable Action. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Study Session 
1. 
Update to the City's Transportation Analysis Methodology to Comply 
with Senate Bill 743, Including use of Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT) for 
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Review and Level of 
Service (LOS) Standard for Local Transportation Analysis (Continued 
from May 4, 2020). 
Sylvia Star-Lack, Transportation Planning Manager reported Senate Bill (SB) 
743 required cities to utilize Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT) in determining 
significant transportation impacts under the California Environmental Quality 
Act (CEQA).  Cities were no longer able to utilize Level of Service (LOS) for 
an environmental document to be considered valid.  Cities had to adopt new 
impact thresholds using VMT by July 1, 2020.  Staff proposed adoption of 
the Governor's Office of Planning and Research's (OPR) guidance and VMT 
thresholds as the City's initial framework beginning July 1, 2020.  Once the 
Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) was updated, the Council was 
able to update the initial VMT thresholds to align with the S/CAP's 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) reduction goals.  Cities were able to utilize LOS to 
determine whether projects were consistent with local plans.  Per 
Comprehensive Plan Policy 2.3, the City was going to retain LOS to assess 
local transportation impacts.   
Bob Grandy, Fehr & Peers advised that the intent of SB 743 was to ensure 
the environmental impacts of traffic were addressed and mitigated through 
CEQA.  In December 2018, the California Natural Resources Agency adopted 
a CEQA Guidelines update package that included a section implementing SB 
743.  Lead agencies had to develop their own VMT thresholds of significance 
to determine when projects had significant environmental traffic impacts.  
The first step in applying the new VMT process was to determine if a project 
met one of several screening criteria.  If a project met one of the criteria, it 
was to be presumed to have a less than significant VMT impact, and no 
mitigation was required.  If a project did not meet one of the screening 
criteria, a quantitative VMT analysis was required to assess whether a 
project exceeded a defined VMT threshold and resulted in an impact.  If a 
significant VMT impact was identified, mitigations were required.  Most 
projects were classified as residential, office or retail uses, and OPR 
recommended a different threshold for each use.  Based on baseline VMTs, 
housing projects in Palo Alto were much less likely to cause significant VMT 
impacts than office projects.  For residential projects that were not screened, 
the Project VMT per capita needed to be 15 percent less than either the 
regional or the Citywide average.  To encourage development of new 
housing in Palo Alto, Staff proposed basing the residential threshold on the 
regional average.  For office projects, the VMT per capita had to be 15 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
percent less than the regional average to have a less than significant impact.  
OPR recommended estimating total change in VMT as the best way to 
analyze a retail project's transportation impacts.  This was done by 
comparing forecasts of total VMT for an area between no project and a plus 
project scenario.  If the project scenario with the Retail Project caused an 
increase in area VMT over the no project scenario without a Retail Project, a 
significant VMT impact was to occur.   
Ms. Star-Lack indicated next steps included adoption of screening criteria, 
VMT thresholds, and a LOS policy in June, 2020, including development of a 
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Ordinance update.   
Kathy Jordan inquired whether the VMT calculations differed based on non-
emitting vehicles versus emitting vehicles.  Prior to the health emergency, 
ridership on mass transit was declining.   
Council Member Filseth asked if the criterion was total VMT or average VMT 
across the region. 
Mr. Grandy related that total VMT was applied to retail projects.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked how the Santa Clara Valley Transportation 
Authority's (VTA) tool accounted for local traffic conditions on local streets, 
requested the source of data used in the tool, and inquired whether there 
was a certain level of street it was able to model. 
Mr. Grandy clarified that the VTA tool would assist the City with the 
screening process for VMT.  City Staff or a project applicant was then to 
enter data specific to the project into VTA's tool to determine whether the 
project could be screened for VMT purposes.  The tool was not going to 
address local traffic.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if a determination of impact or no impact could be 
appealed.   
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official stated Staff could include an 
appeal process. 
Mr. Shikada believed the threshold leading to a more-detailed analysis and 
the definition of significant impact could be addressed through the policy 
that Staff would develop. 
Vice Mayor DuBois generally agreed with the initial VMT thresholds.  He 
inquired whether any bus routes with 15-minute headways existed in the 
City.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Mr. Star-Lack replied yes, along El Camino Real. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired whether SB 743 prevented an increase in vehicle 
capacity on a street. 
Mr. Grandy explained that SB 743 directed one to evaluate a capacity-
increasing project and identify the level of impact and whether the impact 
could be mitigated.   
Vice Mayor DuBois wished to discuss LOS and VMT thresholds and how the 
two could work together.  He inquired whether a regional shopping 
destination like Stanford Shopping Center would score poorly under VMT and 
perhaps require a CEQA analysis. 
Mr. Grandy suggested the impact depended upon the type of retail being 
added.   
Vice Mayor DuBois requested potential mitigations for a project that added a 
destination retail use.   
Mr. 
Grandy 
explained 
that 
near-term 
mitigations 
could 
be 
active 
transportation improvements that offset the increase in VMT.  He said long-
term mitigations could be VMT exchanges and mitigation banks.  A number 
of agencies were basing their impact fee programs on VMT generation rather 
than vehicle trips.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the effect of GHG-emitting vehicles 
and non-GHG emitting vehicles on VMT. 
Mr. Grandy advised that VMT calculations considered the fleet mix and mode 
share.  The fleet mix would likely have more of an impact on GHG than 
vehicle trips. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the fleet mix and mode share would change 
over time. 
Mr. Grandy indicated the near-term assessment of VMT would compare land 
use projects and the baseline.  Some projects included the cumulative 
condition for fleet mix and mode share.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether telecommuting could be factored 
into VMT.   
Mr. Grandy related that conditions prior to the health emergency and the 
potential effects of increased telecommuting and reduced transit share would 
be factors. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Council Member Kou inquired whether VMT could calculate and measure 
when a vehicle was idling on the freeway. 
Mr. Grandy clarified that VMT could estimate the total amount of traffic and 
speeds on the network.  That information was able to be included in an 
analysis of GHG emissions based on vehicle fleet mix and other 
characteristics to produce the GHG output.   
Council Member Kou asked if a new baseline for air quality had been 
established. 
Mr. Grandy was not aware of any new studies regarding adjustments to VMT 
or GHG reduction targets based on COVID.   
Council Member Kou asked if a destination retail use would limit the type of 
businesses on University Avenue. 
Mr. Grandy advised that the type of business was a policy decision for the 
Council.   
Council Member Kou asked if a VMT analysis addressed a change in use for a 
building. 
Mr. Kamhi indicated a change in use would be a planning and zoning 
decision. 
Council Member Kou asked if the Planning and Transportation Commission 
(PTC) would review VMT thresholds and framework. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified that Staff would return to the Council on June 15, 2020 
to adopt VMT thresholds for screening criteria.  The PTC was able to review 
VMT at a later time. 
Council Member Cormack requested the rationale for selecting OPR guidance 
rather than guidance from the California Air Resources Board (CARB). 
Mr. Grandy indicated most jurisdictions were adopting the OPR guidance 
because of its documentation and substantial evidence.   
Mr. Kamhi added that Staff could evolve the model and methods as needed.   
Council Member Cormack inquired about the definition of a low VMT area. 
Mr. Grandy stated it was 15 percent below the average. 
Council Member Cormack asked if retail included services. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Mr. Grandy indicated there were two different thresholds for office and retail 
uses. 
Mayor Fine felt the retail threshold needed additional detail and encouraged 
the Council to adopt the OPR guidance.  VMT analysis encouraged transit use 
and low-impact projects.   
Council Member Kou inquired whether a VMT analysis considered cars 
traveling through Palo Alto to reach their destination. 
Mr. Grandy indicated a VMT analysis would be conducted for projects within 
the City of Palo Alto.   
Council Member Kou remarked that LOS addressed local issues, and VMT 
addressed regional issues.   
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Ed Shikada, City Manager noted Agenda Item Numbers 3 and 4 had been 
removed from the Agenda. 
Oral Communications 
Phoebe Berghout urged the Council to consider the impacts of the Children's 
Theater and the Teen Arts Council on teens and youth in the community 
when making Budget cuts. 
Kathy Jordan noted the number of management employees earning more 
than $150,000, $200,000, and $300,000 annually and inquired about the 
cost of consultants. 
Maya Mazor-Hoofien shared the many benefits of the Teen Arts Council.   
Aanika asked the Council to continue to fund the Teen Arts Council. 
Michael Ekwall requested the Council consider allowing restaurants to open 
outdoor seating with alcohol service so that restaurants could survive the 
next phase of the Shelter-In-Place Order. 
Gil Wiessman advised that creative expression through art was highly 
conducive to students' wellbeing and mental health and urged the Council to 
continue to fund and value the Children's Theatre and the Teen Arts Council. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Max Rosenblum shared his experiences and the value of the Teen Arts 
Council. 
Terry Holzemer hoped the Council preserved and maintained community and 
public services over capital projects in the upcoming Budget.   
Swati Goel related her valuable experiences with Children's Theatre.   
Leo Marburg supported continued funding for the Teen Arts Council.   
Maddie Lee hoped the Council would continue to support the Teen Arts 
Council and its many positive impacts on youth. 
Suzanne Keehn supported continued funding for community services. 
Jeremy Erman related the history of the Children's Theatre and requested 
the Council continue to fund it and Children's Library. 
Jonathan Erman expressed concern that the Council did not plan to 
renegotiate the lease for Cubberley Community Center and fund children's 
programming.   
Consent Calendar 
Keith Bennett, addressing Agenda Item Number 5 requested removal of the 
Agenda Item from the Consent Calendar and the addition of sufficient 
conditions to reduce the risk of death or damage to the 300-year-old 
heritage oak tree.  Dewatering at the site needed to be expressly prohibited.   
Jack Morton, addressing Agenda Item Number 5 believed the Council had a 
responsibility to ensure the tree was cared for.   
Council Member Cormack disclosed communications with the appellant in 
Agenda Item Number 5. 
Vice Mayor DuBois had nothing to disclose. 
Council Member Filseth disclosed a site visit and a conversation with the 
appellant. 
Mayor Fine disclosed a conversation with the appellant. 
Council Member Kniss disclosed a conversation with Mr. Morton, a site visit, 
and the location of the project site approximately two blocks from her home. 
Council Member Kou had nothing to disclose. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Council Member Tanaka disclosed a conversation with Mr. Morton. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou, 
third by Council Member Kniss to remove Agenda Item Number 5 to be 
heard after Council’s summer recess. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 2. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to approve Agenda Item Number 2. 
2. 
Adoption of an Ordinance Amending Title 12 of the Palo Alto Municipal 
Code to set a 120-day Statute of Limitations for Challenges to the 
City’s Water Service Rates, Wastewater Collection and Disposal Rates, 
Refuse Rates, Storm Water Management Fees, and Fiber Licensing 
Service Rates. 
3. 
Approval and Authorization for the City Manager or Designee to 
Execute a Professional Services Agreement with Magellan Advisors, 
LLC in a Not-to-Exceed Amount of $214,236 for Phase 1 of the Fiber 
Network Expansion Plan (This Item has been removed). 
4. 
Approval and Authorization for the City Manager or Designee to 
Execute the Following Marketing and Graphics Contracts in a Combined 
Not-to-Exceed Amount of $290,000 Annually and a Combined Not-to-
Exceed Amount of $1,450,000 Over a Five-year Term:  A) Eric 
Goldsberry Art Direction, Contract Number C20176172A; B) Marketing 
for Change, Contract Number C20176172B; and C) Underground 
Advertising, Contract Number C20176172C; Finding of California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Exemption (This Item has been 
removed). 
5. 
QUASI-JUDICIAL. 2353 Webster Street [18PLN-00339]: Appeal of 
Director’s Approval of an Individual Review Application to Demolish an 
Existing One-story 1,593 Square Foot Home and Construct a Two-
story Home (Approximately 3,133 Square Feet) With a Basement and 
Attached Garage; Approved by the Director of Planning and  
Development Services on March 17, 2020. Zoning District: Single-
family Residential (R-1). 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
Council Member Tanaka noted increases in gas rates over the past few 
years, high gas rates for commercial customers and the difficult economic 
times for restaurants.  A statute of limitations did not support transparency. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Ed Shikada, City Manager advised that Staff would work with the applicant 
and the appellant in Agenda Item Number 5 to set a hearing date.  The 
statute of limitations in Agenda Item Number 2 would not apply to the rate 
changes currently under consideration. 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager shared modifications of the Shelter-In-Place Order 
and the reopening of City facilities.  Additional information regarding the 
City's Small Business Grant Program was going to be available in the next 
few days.  Palo Alto businesses were invited to share their needs and 
requests for assistance with the City.  Professional and Management Staff 
were able to contribute to a 15 percent compensation giveback to the City.   
Council Member Kniss reported there was no immediate plan to reopen the 
Dish. 
Council Member Kou asked how the phased reopening affected the Shelter-
In-Place Order. 
Mr. Shikada advised that the new term was "additional businesses and 
additional activities," and it represented the reopening of retail businesses 
for curbside service on Friday.  Shelter In Place remained in effect. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney noted workers could be returning to work in 
retail businesses. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the City would close streets so that 
restaurant customers could follow social distancing practices. 
Ms. Stump stated outdoor seating for restaurants was not allowed in Santa 
Clara County or in any other Bay Area county at the current time. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the City would subscribe to the United 
States Tennis Association's guidelines for tennis play. 
Mr. Shikada indicated the City would follow the County of Santa Clara's 
public health order, which allowed members of the same household to play 
tennis together. 
Mayor Fine inquired regarding dog parks. 
Ms. Stump did not believe there had been any modifications for dog parks. 
Council took at break at 9:23 P.M. and returned at 9:33 P.M. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
6. 
Adoption of Amendments to the City of Palo Alto Tobacco Retail 
Ordinance (PAMC Chapter 4.64) to Further Restrict Electronic Cigarette 
Products and Flavored Tobacco Products, Direct Staff to Discuss 
Amending the Tobacco Retail Permit (TRP) Agreement With the County 
of Santa Clara, and Updates to Council's Previous Questions on 
Reducing Youth Tobacco use (Continued From May 18, 2020). 
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director reviewed the Council's direction to 
Staff on December 9, 2019, and the City's efforts to reduce community 
exposure to second-hand smoke and to address tobacco sales in Palo Alto.   
Julie Weiss, Public Works Project Manager reported Staff had drafted an 
update to the Tobacco Retail Permit Ordinance.  A State law became 
effective January 1, 2020 and required an adult to sign for online purchases 
of tobacco products and required the package be labeled as a tobacco 
product.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) banned the sale and 
distribution of flavored pods for e-cigarettes.  Senate Bill (SB) 793 banned 
flavored tobacco products across the State.  She said SB 464 could ban the 
sale of single-use electronic cigarettes.  In January 2020, all adult-only 
stores required proof of age during the Police Department's undercover 
checks; however, three of the remaining tobacco retailers did not require 
proof of age.  The ThinkFund was to receive funding for youth-led initiatives 
to reduce tobacco use.  The Public Works Department was able to distribute 
free no-smoking signs to businesses.  Public education for electronic 
cigarette disposal was planned for 2020.  Twenty-two licensed tobacco 
retailers were located in Palo Alto, and Staff had discussed proposed 
Ordinance changes with them.  Three vape/tobacco stores, Hookah Nites, 
and Mac's Smoke Shop indicated they would likely close if they were not 
exempt from the proposed changes.  The proposed Ordinance prohibited the 
sale of electronic cigarette devices, exempted the existing adult-only stores, 
and added restrictions for the five existing adult-only stores.  Ms. Weiss 
summarized public comments and responses to public comments.   
Phil Bobel, Assistant Director of Public Works advised that the proposed 
Ordinance would prohibit 15 tobacco retailers from selling flavored tobacco 
and e-cigarette products; impose additional requirements on adult-only 
stores; and prevent the opening of additional adult-only stores.  The Council 
was able to consider additional measures to further strengthen the proposed 
Ordinance and reduce teen vaping in the future.  The Council was able to 
direct Staff to explore additional restrictions for adult-only stores, an 
alternative exemption structure for retailers, and additional measures to 
reduce the number of adult-only stores or direct Staff to modify the 
proposed Ordinance to eliminate the exemption for adult-only stores and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
introduce a future effective compliance date for the existing adult-only 
stores.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if adult-only stores could sell flavored tobacco 
products. 
Mr. Bobel clarified that the proposed Ordinance would prohibit tobacco 
retailers that allowed youth in the store from selling flavored tobacco and 
vaping products.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about enforcement for adults who 
purchased tobacco products for youth.   
Mr. Bobel indicated the Police Department investigated reports of youth 
loitering near tobacco retailers.  Enforcement was not possible when an adult 
and a youth worked together for the adult to purchase tobacco products in 
person or online for the youth.   
Council Member Filseth inquired whether the second option before the 
Council would allow Hookah Nites to continue operating.  
Mr. Bobel related that the second option would eliminate all adult-only 
stores, including Hookah Nites.  The Council was able to direct Staff to 
modify the proposed Ordinance to allow Hookah Nites, Mac's, or both to 
remain open.  The existing cigar stores were not able to choose not to sell 
vaping products.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if Staff considered distinguishing flavored pipe 
tobacco from flavored vaping pods.   
Mr. Bobel stated the definition of flavored products was taken from the 
County of Santa Clara's (County) model Ordinance.   
Amaya Wooding, Proudly Against Tobacco advocated for removing the 
exemption for adult-only stores. 
Carol Baker, American Cancer Society and Tobacco Free Coalition of Santa 
Clara County supported a complete prohibition of flavored tobacco products. 
Lama Rimawi urged the Council to eliminate the exemption for adult-only 
stores.   
Erwin Morton recommended the Council remove the exemption for adult-
only stores, phase out the sale or transfer of vape shop licenses, and protect 
children. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Bob Gordon, Tobacco Free Coalition of Santa Clara County indicated hookah 
smoking was as dangerous as cigarette smoking and urged elimination of 
the exemption for adult-only stores.   
Annie Tegen, Tobacco Free Kids hoped the Council would eliminate the 
exemption for adult-only stores. 
Lori Khoury, Mac's Smoke Shop related that the pandemic and elimination of 
the exemption would force the shop to close.  Mac's Smoke Shop supported 
a more restrictive Ordinance and had implemented measures beyond those 
required and proposed.   
Jen Gran-Lejano, American Cancer Society urged the Council to remove the 
proposed exemption for adult-only stores, including Hookah Nites.   
Arian Lundberg urged the Council to adopt an Ordinance that mirrored the 
County's Ordinance.   
Tricia Barr asked the Council to adopt the County's Ordinance without an 
exemption and read Congresswoman Eshoo's message opposing an 
exemption for adult-only stores.   
Sally-Ann Rudd advised that her 16-year-old daughter had recently 
purchased vaping products from Mac's Smoke Shop and requested the 
Council eliminate the exemption. 
Jade Chao, Palo Alto PTA Council President indicated she had distributed 
photos to the Council of teens purchasing vape products in Palo Alto.  She 
urged the Council to protect children from a highly addictive product. 
Rachel Gratz-Lazarus advocated for removal of the exemption for adult-only 
stores. 
Grace Mah remarked that banning all e-cigarettes in all stores would 
demonstrate Palo Alto's leadership in saving youth from the vaping epidemic 
and a lifetime of addiction. 
Eileen Kim urged the Council to adopt a strong Ordinance that mirrored the 
County's Ordinance without any exemption. 
Blythe Young, American Heart Association supported a comprehensive 
Ordinance without an exemption for adult-only retailers or hookah lounges.   
Raw Smoke Shop commented that 21-year-old adults would purchase 
products online or in stores in nearby cities, thus reducing potential revenue 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
for the City.  Vaping products provided 80 percent of his revenue.  He 
concurred with additional restrictions for adult-only stores.   
Amar Johal, tobacco retailer remarked that the proposed Ordinance would 
divert sales from 15 tobacco retailers to five adult-only stores.  He supported 
the prohibition on flavored products as long as the exemption for adult-only 
stores was removed. 
Tanya Payyappilly, Breathe California urged the Council to remove the 
exemption and to restrict youth access to vape products. 
Vanessa Marvin, Tobacco Free Coalition asked the Council to follow the 
County's Ordinance. 
David Zoumut, Hookah Lounge was not averse to additional restrictions.  He 
did not sell any vape products, cigarettes or cigars.   
Council Member Kou did not believe enforcement of the proposed Ordinance 
would occur soon enough.  She inquired whether she could move to direct 
Staff to prepare an Ordinance that mirrored the County's Ordinance. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney replied yes. 
Council Member Kou asked when a Draft Ordinance could be presented to 
the Council for a first reading. 
Tim Shimizu, City Attorney Office's indicated a Draft Ordinance could be 
presented as soon as Brown Act requirements allowed. 
Ms. Stump suggested an Ordinance could be presented to the Council as 
soon as June 1, 2020. 
Council Member Kou asked if it would be presented as an Action Item. 
Ms. Stump advised that it could be placed on the Council's Consent Calendar 
for a first reading on June 1, 2020.   
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth 
to direct Staff to bring to the City Council a proposed tobacco Ordinance that 
mirrors the Santa Clara County Ordinance.  
Council Member Filseth read Ms. Rudd's correspondence to the Council.  
Mac's Smoke Shop was covered with signage about selling tobacco products 
to minors.  He believed Ms. Rudd's claim that her daughter purchased vape 
products at Mac's Smoke Shop and Mac's Smoke Shop was attempting to 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
prevent the sale of tobacco products to minors.  He requested the difference 
between the second option before the Council and the Motion. 
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director explained that the second option 
would eliminate the exemption for adult-only stores that sold tobacco 
products for off-site use.  In other words, Hookah Nites was probably able to 
continue to operate.   
Council Member Filseth proposed amending the Motion to exempt stores that 
did not sell products for off-site use. 
Council Member Kou understood the second option would direct Staff to 
return to the Council at a future date with a proposed Ordinance. 
Mr. Bobel added that the second option would allow Hookah Nights to 
continue to operate and set a compliance date beyond the standard 30 days 
following a second reading of the Ordinance.   
Council Member Kou did not agree to amend the Motion.   
Council Member Tanaka noted the proposed Ordinance would not provide 
the same number of compliance checks as the County Ordinance.   
Mr. Bobel clarified that the County did not provide undercover age checks 
and believed undercover work fell under the Police Department's purview.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Motion would prohibit the sale of 
flavored tobacco and vaping products in all tobacco retailers. 
Mr. Bobel answered yes. 
Council Member Filseth asked if non-flavored vaping products would be 
prohibited as well. 
Mr. Bobel replied yes. 
Council Member Tanaka shared the Palo Alto Youth Council's (PAYC) 
suggestion to ban the advertising of all vaping products in Palo Alto and 
inquired whether the City could do that. 
Ms. Stump indicated advertising restrictions could have First Amendment 
implications, and additional study was needed.   
Council Member Tanaka reported the PAYC had also suggested a contest for 
teens to develop anti-vaping campaigns.  He requested Council Members 
comment regarding a ban on vaping in all public spaces.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Council Member Cormack stated Staff had prepared an Ordinance that 
complied with the Council's direction to Staff.  Vaping was a public health 
issue.  She inquired about the age requirement for admittance to Hookah 
Nites. 
Mr. Bobel answered 21 years of age. 
Council Member Kniss did not support the Motion because it would 
negatively impact small businesses.   
Mayor Fine did not support the Motion because adults and youth understood 
the danger of tobacco products.  The City was able to take reasonable steps 
to protect youth while allowing adults to purchase tobacco products.  The 
Motion closed five small businesses.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if some restaurants had cigar rooms and sold 
cigars. 
Council Member Kniss responded yes. 
Mr. Eggleston clarified that two of the seven adult-only stores focused on the 
sale of cigars.   
Vice Mayor DuBois expressed concern that the Motion would prevent adults 
of legal age from buying tobacco products.  Some of the adult-only stores 
had been in the community for a long time and were responsible tobacco 
sellers.  He opposed the Motion.  An outright ban of tobacco products would 
be government overreach and exceed the measures needed to protect kids. 
Council Member Kou asked if the County would not handle enforcement if 
the City's Ordinance did not mirror the County's Ordinance. 
Mr. Eggleston reported the County had stated that.  If the Council approved 
Staff's recommended Ordinance, Staff was then going to address 
enforcement with the County.   
Council Member Kou did not believe City Staff would have resources to 
enforce the Ordinance. 
Mr. Bobel explained that Staff would continue the enforcement discussion 
with the County no matter what the Council decided.  The City was the only 
County partner that allowed adult-only stores.  City Staff visited the stores 
to check compliance with other City Ordinances and checking compliance 
with the Tobacco Ordinance was not burdening Staff.  The cost of Staff time 
was offset by permit fees.  The County did not and would not conduct 
undercover checks.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Council Member Kou understood Council Members' opposition to the Motion; 
however, children's health was at issue.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION: Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to adopt the proposed Ordinance and direct Staff to explore the 
following and return to Council at a later date: 
A. 
Investigate further restrictions for adult-only stores (e.g., card 
readers, purchase log, additional fees to support youth programs, 
etc.); 
B. 
Consider alternative exemption structure for retailers, e.g., exempt 
lounges where no product leaves the store; and 
C. 
Consider additional measures over time to reduce the number of  
adult-only stores. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED:  3-4 Cormack, Filseth, Kou, Tanaka no 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Vice Mayor 
DuBois to direct Staff to modify the proposed Ordinance and return to 
Council at a future date, eliminating the current exemption for those adult 
stores where the subject products leave the store, introduce a future 
effective compliance date that would allow the other four impacted adult-
only stores time to sell/remove their current inventory, and modify their 
business model to address the exemption elimination. 
Mayor Fine preferred to craft a unique Ordinance for the City.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if Staff would present a Draft Ordinance to the 
Council in June, 2020. 
Mayor Fine understood a first reading could occur in June, 2020. 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to provide the adult-only stores with time to 
adapt.   
Council Member Cormack did not interpret the Substitute Motion as a first 
reading occurring in June, 2020. 
Mr. Eggleston reported, if the Council approved the Substitute Motion, Staff 
would engage the adult-only stores, develop a recommendation to phase out 
products, and present the Council with a proposed Ordinance.  The Council 
was able to direct Staff to return within a specific timeframe. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois thought the Substitute Motion was to pass the first option 
and to direct Staff to return with a proposed Ordinance for the second 
option. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the Substitute Motion would eliminate the 
exemption for adult-only stores and set a compliance date.  She preferred 
the compliance date occur within six months.  She inquired about the 
Substitute Motion's effect on Hookah Nites. 
Mr. Bobel explained that Hookah Nites would not be affected by the 
Substitute Motion because tobacco products did not leave the store. 
Council Member Kniss requested the meaning of a future effective 
compliance date. 
Mr. Bobel advised that Staff engage the adult-only stores in setting a 
compliance date by which they would have to sell or remove their inventory. 
Council Member Kniss did not know whether the businesses would have an 
opportunity to alter their business models in such a way that they could 
continue to operate.   
Mr. Bobel clarified that the businesses would have time to obtain other 
products to sell and continue to operate.  The County's Ordinance required 
compliance by July 1, 2020.   
Council Member Kou agreed to allowing onsite consumption of tobacco 
products but not Staff returning at a later date with an Ordinance.  The 
County was to implement, permit and enforce the Ordinance.   
Council Member Filseth suggested incorporating a timeframe for businesses 
to modify their business models into the Substitute Motion.  Businesses were 
probably not able to adapt before the July 1, 2020 deadline set by the 
County. 
Mayor Fine asked if three or six months was a reasonable timeframe. 
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed to six months. 
Council Member Filseth indicated six months was generous. 
Council Member Cormack felt six months could be the outer bound. 
Ms. Stump advised that under the Substitute Motion the Council would not 
adopt an Ordinance at the current time or before the Council break.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff could present a Draft Ordinance in 
August, 2020 such that it would become effective in September, 2020. 
Ms. Stump related the timeframe for developing policy, preparing a Staff 
Report, and adoption of an Ordinance was probably not feasible by August, 
2020.   
Council Member Filseth asked if the Substitute Motion was proposing to 
incorporate a grace period and an exemption for onsite tobacco use into the 
County Ordinance. 
Mr. Bobel replied yes.   
Mayor Fine asked if three months would be feasible. 
Mr. Bobel understood the Council was proposing six months for businesses 
to comply with the Ordinance and three months for Staff to return with a 
Draft Ordinance. 
Ms. Stump related that Staff could return with a Draft Ordinance after the 
Council break, and the Council could set a compliance date at that time. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the compliance date could be September 1, 
2020. 
Ms. Stump responded no. 
Mr. Eggleston indicated the earliest compliance date would be early October, 
2020. 
Mayor Fine suggested a compliance date of as soon as possible. 
Council Member Filseth did not understand why Staff could not return with a 
Draft Ordinance prior to the Council break. 
Ms. Stump reported Staff could return prior to the Council break if the 
direction to Staff was to incorporate an exception for products that did not 
leave the store and a compliance date into the County Ordinance.  Any other 
direction to Staff delayed Staff's return to the Council. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the second option allowed the right to run 
with the store. 
Mr. Eggleston answered that is correct. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed the right end with the current owner. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Mayor Fine believed that would be the first option.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether the Substitute Motion would 
exempt only Hookah Nites. 
Mr. Bobel replied yes.  The Council was able to direct Staff to draft an 
Ordinance that did not allow the sale or transfer of Hookah Nites' permit.   
Mayor Fine did not agree with preventing the sale or transfer of Hookah 
Nites' permit. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if Hookah Nites could continue to sell flavored 
tobacco and vape products for onsite use only. 
Mr. Bobel responded yes. 
Council Member Tanaka questioned whether Hookah Nites needed to sell 
flavored products. 
Mr. Bobel advised that the owner of Hookah Nites explained that his 
customers wanted flavored products. 
Council 
Member Tanaka questioned whether children with 
a fake 
identification could enter Hookah Nites. 
Mr. Bobel indicated a card reader was able to determine whether an 
identification was fake.   
Mayor Fine reiterated the three choices before the Council. 
Council Member Tanaka supported requiring a card reader, not allowing 
Hookah Nites to transfer their license and setting the compliance date for 
three months. 
Ms. Stump asked if the Draft Ordinance should be presented as an Action 
Item so that the Council could determine the compliance date. 
Mayor Fine proposed a compliance date of September 1, 2020. 
Ms. Stump related that the date was feasible.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE SUBSTITUTE MOTION WITH CONSENT OF 
THE MAKER AND SECONDER to add a compliance date of September 1, 
2020.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Council Member Kou asked if, under the Motion, the Council was going to 
approve a Draft Ordinance that would become effective prior to the Council 
break. 
Ms. Stump indicated a first reading of the proposed Ordinance under the 
Motion was able to occur on June 1, 2020, but the effective date was not 
July 1, 2020, the County's compliance date. 
Council Member Kou noted an Ordinance was not going to be implemented 
quickly and enforcement was going to be an issue under the Substitute 
Motion.   
Council Member Kniss asked if four stores would be forced to close. 
Mr. Bobel answered yes. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the four businesses would cease 
operations under the Substitute Motion. 
Mr. Bobel anticipated that would occur. 
Council Member Cormack believed the Substitute Motion would prolong the 
pain for the businesses.   
Mr. Eggleston added that the Substitute Motion would allow Hookah Nites to 
continue in business. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE SUBSTITUTE MOTION WITH CONSENT OF 
THE MAKER AND SECONDER to return to Council prior to the summer 
recess.  
SUBSTITUTE MOTION RESTATED: Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Vice 
Mayor DuBois to direct Staff to modify the proposed Ordinance and return to 
Council prior to the summer recess, eliminating the current exemption for 
those adult stores where the subject products leave the store, introduce a 
future effective compliance date of September 1, 2020 that would allow the 
other four impacted adult-only stores time to sell/remove their current 
inventory, and modify their business model to address the exemption 
elimination. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED:  3-4 Cormack, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka no  
MOTION PASSED:  4-3 DuBois, Fine, Kniss no 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  05/18/2020 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Filseth reported the receipt of six proposals to provide 
auditor services.  The proposals were to be evaluated the following week. 
Council Member Kou asked the Mayor to look into the proposal to eliminate 
community-based adult services effective January 1, 2021 and to prepare a 
letter if appropriate.   
Mayor Fine requested Staff provide an update. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:58 P.M. 
