CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 24 
Special Meeting 
September 21, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in Virtual 
Teleconference at 5:04 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None. 
Oral Communications 
Dexter Girton remarked regarding traffic congestion on Embarcadero if 
Churchill Avenue was closed.   
Fred Balin commented on the actions of Planning and Transportation 
Commissioner Alcheck with respect to the Castilleja environmental document. 
Consent Calendar 
MOTION: Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou, third 
by Council Member Filseth to move Agenda Item Numbers 1 and 3 to a date 
uncertain.  
Eileen Altman, addressing Agenda Item Number 4, appreciated the City's 
support of Project Safety Net, which was now a nonprofit agency. 
Rebecca Eisenberg, addressing Agenda Item Number 1, opposed the 
expenditure of any additional funding for the California Avenue parking garage 
and suggested the project be halted.   
Shashank V. Joshi, addressing Agenda Item Number 4 thanked the Council for 
its leadership in forming and supporting Project Safety Net. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to approve 
Agenda Item Numbers 2, 4-6. 
1. 
Approval of Construction Cameras for use at the California Avenue 
Parking Garage and Highway 101 Pedestrian/Bicycle Overpass 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Construction Projects; and Approval of a Parking Guidance System in 
Accordance With the Surveillance and Privacy Protection Ordinance. 
2. 
Approve Contract Amendments to Extend the Following Banking and 
Related Services Contracts: 1) U.S. Bank and its Wholly-owned 
Subsidiary Elavon for General Banking and Merchant Services; 2) Wells 
Fargo for Lockbox Services; 3) Union Bank for Investment Safekeeping 
(Custodial) Services; and 4) JP Morgan Chase Bank for Purchase Card 
(P-card) Services. 
3. 
Consideration of an Appeal of a Director's Interpretation Made Pursuant 
to Palo Alto Municipal Code Section 18.01.025 and Related to Seismic 
Rehabilitation. The Project is Exempt From the California Environmental 
Quality Act (CEQA) in Accordance With CEQA Guidelines 15061(b)(3). 
4. 
Approval of a Contract Between Project Safety Net, Inc. for Youth Mental 
Health Support in the Amount of $100,000 per Year; Approval of a One-
time Transfer of $21,604 in Donations for a Not-to-Exceed Amount of 
$521,604 for the Term of September 21, 2020 Through June 30, 2025; 
and Approval of a Budget Amendment in the Public Services Donation 
Fund by a Two-thirds Vote. 
5. 
Resolution 9914 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto to Extend the Bicycle and Electric Scooter Share Pilot Program for 
18 Months.” 
6. 
Resolution 9915 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Approving and Authorizing the City Manager or Designee to Execute 
the Continuing Reimbursement Agreement for Letters of Credit With US 
Bank National Association at an Estimated Cost of $35,000 per Year in 
Connection With the City’s Market Purchase Program Agreement With 
Northern California Power Association (NCPA);” and Authorizing the 
Execution and Delivery of all Documents Relating to the Letters of 
Credit. 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 2, 4-6:  7-0 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager reported a new Public Health Order increased 
COVID-19 testing requirement for healthcare providers.  Individuals who had 
problems obtaining testing were able to contact www.scccovidconcerns.org.  
Testing in Palo Alto was scheduled for September 25 and October 9 and 23.  
Free influenza vaccines were available every Saturday throughout the fall.  
The deadline to submit Census questionnaires was September 30, 2020.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Ballots were able to be returned by mail or dropped off at Mitchell Park Library, 
Rinconada Library, or City Hall.  In-person voting was to begin October 5, 
2020 at the Registrar of Voters Office and October 31, 2020 at vote centers.  
The 89th season of Children's Theatre was to begin September 26, 2020 with 
a virtual production of Little Red Riding Hood.   
Mayor Fine encouraged the community to obtain influenza vaccines, complete 
the Census and vote. 
Rail Communications Update 
7. 
Connecting Palo Alto Rail Grade Separation: Receive an Update From 
the Expanded Community Advisory Panel (XCAP). 
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official reported a virtual Town Hall 
regarding grade separation remained available for review; however, the 
opportunity to comment ended.  More than 1,000 unique visitors submitted 
more than 600 feedback forms.  The consultant was analyzing the feedback 
to prepare a complete report.  The Caltrain corridor-wide Grade Separation 
Study was to provide Staff with additional information for inclusion in the 
selected alternatives.   
Nadia Naik, Expanded Community Advisory Panel (XCAP) Co-Chair advised 
that the XCAP membership decreased from 14 to 9.  The XCAP was meeting 
weekly to compensate for the six-week delay caused by COVID-19.  Public 
attendance increased with the implementation of virtual meetings; however, 
virtual meetings limited the give-and-take of in-person discussions.  In 
addition, the Budget shortfall impacted the XCAP's ability to obtain analyses 
from AECOM.  The XCAP obtained several traffic studies and a Noise and 
Vibration Report; received letters from the Fire and Police Departments 
regarding circulation; and developed many renderings, animations and 
matrices to understand the alternatives.  Three members of the community 
provided new alternatives for consideration.  A volunteer team of civil 
engineers assisted the XCAP with analyzing alternatives.  XCAP Member Cari 
Templeton prepared a dynamic matrix that helped the XCAP understand the 
differences between needs and wants.  Community members researched 
promising new construction methods, which Caltrain was discussing.  
Documents for the newest alternatives were not fully developed because of 
the lack of funding.  Alternatives were intertwined with the Caltrain four-track 
issue.  The most promising alternatives required collaboration with Caltrain in 
order to advance.  Caltrain and High Speed Rail were debating the need, 
location and payment for passing tracks.  Consequently, Caltrain had taken 
the position that four tracks were able to continue to exist at the Churchill, 
Meadow and Charleston crossings.  The Corridor-wide Study was not to design 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
grade separations, but it was to provide answers to technical questions.  
According to Caltrain, if Palo Alto wished to proceed, they were going to need 
to pay for Caltrain to hire consultants to answer technical questions or weave 
their work into the Corridor-Wide Study.  The XCAP voted 6-3 to close 
Churchill.  The members voting against the Motion believed the XCAP could 
have benefited from additional analysis.  The XCAP was to begin deliberations 
regarding South Palo Alto on Wednesday.  Aside from the underpass 
alternative, alternatives for South Palo Alto needed to be re-evaluated for four 
tracks.  The underpass alternatives had had the least amount of public review.  
Except for the underpass and hybrid alternatives, all alternatives required 
design variances for percent grade.  She requested Council guidance regarding 
the XCAP's continued work and next steps. 
Inder Monga suggested the XCAP provide pros and cons rather than yes/no 
votes, a comprehensive report of their findings and areas that needed 
additional study.  Requiring the XCAP to make decisions without all the data 
resulted in selections that were not appropriate. 
Rebecca Eisenberg believed the loss of five XCAP members affected 
community representation on the XCAP.  She inquired about research into 
undergrounding the Caltrain tracks and possible uses for the land revealed by 
undergrounding.   
David Kennedy believed the Council's evaluation criteria limited the number 
of reasonable and viable alternatives.  The Council needed to ask the XCAP if 
the criteria should be modified.  The closure of Churchill was contrary to the 
Comprehensive Plan.   
Eileen Fagan remarked that the XCAP did not utilized the evaluation criteria 
when making decisions.  The recommendation to close Churchill was contrary 
to the evaluation criteria.   
Susan Newman concurred with prior comments and opposed the closure of 
Churchill.  The Traffic Study was seriously flawed. 
Reshma Singh recommended the Council strive for an equitable solution.  
Ignoring walkability and livability in making decisions was a huge impediment 
to equity.  The Council needed to replace the five members lost from the XCAP.   
Rob Levitsky objected to the closure of Churchill because it would export traffic 
to Embarcadero. 
Lisa Nissim urged the Council to restudy the Churchill alternatives because the 
XCAP had not received all necessary information. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Council Member Kniss requested a perspective on Caltrain and grade 
separations. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager indicated the Council had charged the XCAP with 
narrowing the alternatives for grade separations by October 2020.  For the 
reasons Ms. Naik stated, the Council was not going to consider alternatives 
until 2021.  The design of grade separations required several years.   
Ms. Naik advised that the most pressing issue for the XCAP was the lack of 
agreement between Caltrain and High Speed Rail for a blended system.   
Council Member Kou asked if Caltrain's Corridor-Wide Study provided the 
XCAP with needed information.   
Ms. Naik related that the scope of work for the study included the percent 
grade and construction methods.  The passing track issue depended on some 
kind of agreement between High Speed Rail and Caltrain.   
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the Rail Corridor Use Policy. 
Mr. Shikada noted Caltrain did not present the Rail Corridor Use Policy to the 
Local Policy Maker Group (LPMG) prior to the Board of Directors adopting it.  
The policy indicated any encroachment into Caltrain's right-of-way would 
require justification and additional analysis. 
Council Member Kou asked if AECOM knew about the policy from the beginning 
and did not notify the City. 
Mr. Kamhi was not aware of AECOM's involvement in Caltrain work.  The 
AECOM team working with Staff did not known about the policy. 
Vice Mayor DuBois expressed concern about passing tracks because they 
affected all alternatives.  Caltrain appeared to be telling the City to stop their 
work.  The Grade Separation Study found that some encroachments were 
acceptable.  In their comment letter to the High Speed Rail Environmental 
Impact Report (EIR), the City needed to highlight the impacts of passing 
tracks.  Given the level of uncertainty, the Council needed to wrap up the 
process with the XCAP providing pros and cons for alternatives rather than 
recommendations.  He preferred the Meadow and Charleston crossings not be 
considered together.  Perhaps the City was able to make progress on bike 
crossings while awaiting Caltrain's Study.  Staff needed to engage with 
Caltrain and invite Caltrain representatives to appear before the Council.  He 
thought the Council may need to re-form the Rail Committee.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Ms. Naik clarified that the XCAP would provide a complete report of all 
information, pros and cons for all alternatives, recommendations and potential 
mitigations. 
Mr. Kamhi stated Caltrain would likely review and learn from the City's grade 
separation information as the City would learn from Caltrain's Corridor-Wide 
Study.  The City did not need to postpone grade separation decisions.   
Mr. Shikada recalled the Council's desire to review grade separation 
alternatives in order to obtain Measure B funding.  Staying connected 
regionally benefitted the City.  The High Speed Rail's EIR not addressing four 
tracks was unforgiveable.   
Ms. Naik reported Mountain View and Sunnyvale could proceed with grade 
separation projects and use Measure B funding because none of their 
alternatives depended on the four-track system.  Neither Mountain View nor 
Sunnyvale had to move the tracks in the way that Palo Alto would.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if both Caltrain and High Speed Rail were interested 
in passing tracks.   
Mr. Shikada understood Caltrain's position was that four tracks were required 
as a result of High Speed Rail. 
Council Member Cormack requested information regarding the noise and 
vibration report. 
Ms. Naik advised that much of the noise was caused by horns and whistles 
signaling gate movement.  With grade separation, gates were not going to be 
needed, and noise was eliminated.  Installing a short sound wall and 
implementing quiet zones mitigated noise. 
Council Member Cormack inquired regarding the criteria and matrices.   
Ms. Naik explained that an XCAP member had drafted a dynamic matrix of 
Council criteria, which the XCAP used to evaluate each alternative.   
Council Member Cormack indicated the City could begin some work that was 
not dependent on the option chosen.  Bike tunnels passing beneath the tracks 
and Alma was logical, but that needed to be discussed in the context of a Bike 
Plan.  In order to pay for grade separations, the crossings needed to be 
grouped into projects. 
Council Member Filseth inquired about the major questions for which the XCAP 
needed information. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Ms. Naik responded the percent grade, jack box construction, and a two-or 
four-track system.  Meadow and Charleston were grouped together because 
of their proximity.  The XCAP was disappointed with the separation of Palo 
Alto Avenue from Churchill particularly as they learned the closure of Churchill 
would greatly affect Embarcadero.  Caltrain was to group the crossings based 
on construction and train schedules.   
Mr. Kamhi added that Staff would explore jack box construction in a later 
phase.  The consultant that worked with jack boxing did not believe it would 
result in a cost savings or would even be feasible.  He felt Jack box 
construction should not inhibit a decision. 
Ms. Naik related that the XCAP had difficulty with the bike and pedestrian 
portions of the new designs because of steep grades.  If passing tracks were 
needed, they were to have a tremendous impact on the design flexibility for 
bicycles and pedestrians.   
Council Member Filseth expressed concern about maintaining focus and 
momentum as information was developed through these studies.   
Mr. Shikada stated governance of Caltrain and the Santa Clara Valley 
Transportation Authority's (VTA) distribution of Measure B funds were under 
discussion.  XCAP recommendations and Staff recommendations hinged on 
the results of the November 2020 election.   
Ms. Naik added that an outcome of the Corridor-Wide Study was the 
identification of a method for delivering multiple grade separation projects 
simultaneously.   
Council Member Tanaka requested other cities' plans for grade separation. 
Ms. Naik reported San Mateo County had exhausted their Measure A funds.  
Burlingame was ready to begin design but did not have sufficient funding. 
Mr. Shikada advised that San Jose identified priority grade separation if 
funding was available.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about projections for Caltrain ridership 
returning to reasonably normal levels. 
Mr. Shikada did not believe anyone was willing to develop projections. 
Council Member Tanaka asked about AECOM's experience with trench 
projects. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Mr. Kamhi believed AECOM had considerable experience with preparing 
estimates for and constructing trench projects. 
Ms. Naik explained that the XCAP chose not to proceed with the South Palo 
Alto tunnel, but the trench remained a viable alternative.  The team of 
volunteer engineers indicated the cost estimate for the trench could be higher 
than necessary.  The grade and design were going to impact costs. 
Mayor Fine supported the XCAP providing pros and cons or votes.  Questions 
from the XCAP were able to be directed to the LPMG.  He requested ideas for 
involving the business community in grade separation discussions. 
Mr. Kamhi noted Stanford University had not provided any feedback, but Palo 
Alto Unified School District (PAUSD) had.  Staff assumed responsibility for 
increasing community engagement and awareness. 
Mayor Fine requested the goals for the XCAP over the next few months. 
Ms. Naik reported the XCAP would begin deliberations for alternatives and was 
drafting their report.   
Council Member Kou asked about engaging with Parent Teacher Associations 
(PTA) for feedback. 
Mr. Kamhi advised that Superintendent Austin with PAUSD shared an email 
with parents regarding the virtual Town Hall.  Staff presented information to 
the City/School Liaison Committee and were going to present to the Safe 
Routes to Schools representatives.  
Ms. Naik noted the XCAP was beginning deliberations and was concerned that 
feedback would not be heard during deliberations. 
Council Member Kou inquired about Caltrain's use of XCAP data for the 
Corridor-Wide Study. 
Ms. Naik explained that all of Palo Alto's data would be the backbone of 
Caltrain's data for Palo Alto. 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Council took a break at 7:19 P.M. and returned at 7:35 P.M. 
Action Items  
8. 
Recommendation of the Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) 
to: 1) Discuss the Draft Economic Analysis Analyzing Potential Increases 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
to Inclusionary Housing Requirements;  2) Maintain the Inclusionary 
Housing Requirements at 15 Percent for Ownership Housing and the 
Housing Impact Fee for Rental Housing; and 3) Authorize an Analysis of 
Specific Adjustments Across the Spectrum of Zoning and Financial 
Factors That Would Support a 20 Percent Inclusionary Housing 
Requirement. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager requested the Council provide a focus for Staff work 
and next steps and the ultimate goal of Staff's work. 
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning and Development Services reported 
affordable housing was produced through construction of subsidized housing 
projects or inclusionary requirements for market-rate housing developments.  
The Council directed Staff to study increasing the inclusionary requirement 
and extending the requirement to rental housing.  The Planning and 
Transportation Commission (PTC) and Staff supported maintaining the status 
quo for ownership requirements and retaining the Housing Impact Fee for 
rental housing.  The City needed to continue to explore tools to achieve a 20 
percent inclusionary rate. 
Sujata Srivastava, Strategic Economics advised that the analysis was intended 
to investigate three key questions:  the impact of increasing the inclusionary 
requirement to 20 percent on development; the impact of a 15 percent 
inclusionary requirement for rental developments on development; and 
strategies to increase the share of inclusionary units.  Staff utilized a pro forma 
analysis to assess the impact of policy changes on development and tested 
prototypes representing typical development projects.  The analysis assumed 
any ownership project that achieved a return on cost of 18 percent or higher 
was highly likely to proceed.  The analysis assumed any rental project that 
achieved a yield on cost of 5 percent or higher was highly likely to proceed.  
The analysis found under current zoning regulations and new ownership 
projects were not likely to support a 20 percent inclusionary requirement.  
Using a lower parking ratio and a lower retail requirement, the analysis found 
that every product type in all zoning districts was likely to support a 20 percent 
inclusionary requirement.  Downtown rental projects were somewhat likely to 
support a 15 percent or 20 percent inclusionary requirement under current 
zoning regulations.  There was insufficient data to predict the cost and revenue 
impacts of COVID-19 at this time. 
Mark Mollineaux remarked that more rental housing was needed.  The Council 
needed to focus on the number of units instead of percentage and set the 
inclusionary rate as high as possible in order not to create more ownership 
housing. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Dennis Martin, Building Industry Association concurred with Staff's 
recommendations and recommended the Council consider a wider range of 
concessions and incentives available to affordable housing developers.   
Gail Price, Palo Alto Forward felt it was imperative to increase housing of all 
types to improve diversity.  The Council and Staff needed to explore changing 
height limits to approximately 65 feet and allowing a Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 
of 3.0.   
Rebecca Eisenberg commented that COVID-19 was creating homelessness.  
Raising Development Fees was a proven method for increasing housing. 
Becky Sanders did not believe the City would achieve the desired amount of 
housing through the current zoning and developer incentives.  The City needed 
to buy real estate and construct a residential project.   
Kelsey Banes agreed with Ms. Price's comments.  The City needed to consider 
public parcels suitable for 100 percent affordable housing. 
Council Member Kniss requested the current number of Below Market Rate 
(BMR) units. 
Mr. Lait replied almost 2,200 units. 
Council Member Kniss requested the number of affordable housing units. 
Mr. Lait indicated the vast majority were constructed through inclusionary 
requirements. 
Council Member Kniss inquired whether a developer was able to build 
inclusionary units or pay an In-Lieu Fee. 
Mr. Lait noted the Council made some changes, and typically developers built 
the units. 
Council Member Kniss asked if the Council expended all of their affordable 
housing funds. 
Mr. Lait related that the balance was low, but additional funds were expected.   
Council Member Kniss commented that building more housing required a 
tradeoff of perhaps services.  
Council Member Filseth inquired about podium parking. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Ms. Srivastava explained that podium parking was located on the ground floor 
of buildings with housing units in the upper stories. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about the types of retail most commonly 
found in a 1,500 square foot space. 
Mr. Lait responded a small diner, coffee shop, a small retail outlet or a yoga 
studio. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff had information about parking usage 
for current projects similar to Prototypes 1a, 1b, 2a, 2b, 4a, and 4b. 
Mr. Lait answered no. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about the timeframe for recalculating the 
Average Median Income (AMI). 
Mr. Lait stated April. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff considered different rules for different 
areas. 
Mr. Lait replied yes, but the Council was able to direct Staff to explore that 
option further. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about the effects of interest rates on the 
calculations for rental housing. 
Ms. Srivastava explained that capitalization rates tended to track with interest 
rates. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if there was any indication of material and labor 
costs decreasing due to COVID-19. 
Ms. Srivastava understood the cost of lumber had risen for residential 
construction. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if implementing the Palmer Fix would replace the 
Impact Fee with an inclusionary requirement for rental housing. 
Mr. Lait responded yes. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested the effect of removing the right to build office in 
some of the zones. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Mr. Lait explained that the prototypes analyzed in the study were relative to 
that type of development rather than to the opportunity cost of not building 
office.   
Ms. Srivastava clarified that the study looked at mixed-use retail projects 
rather than office projects. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about the elasticity of inputs. 
Ms. Srivastava advised that there were many small sites in Palo Alto that were 
difficult to aggregate and assemble, which added to the cost of development.  
The land costs for most projects were high.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the amount of new inclusionary housing 
that could be built in Palo Alto. 
Mr. Lait answered about 110 units, with 102 units located in the San Antonio 
Project. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if Staff had conducted an Elasticity Analysis. 
Mr. Lait indicated at 15 percent; development was somewhat likely, except in 
the Downtown area.  Increasing the requirement to 20 percent decreased the 
likelihood of development. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about data for other cities. 
Mr. Lait related that an apples-to-apples comparison was not possible because 
of different zoning requirements.  The City charged an Impact Fee for rental 
housing, but projects were not proposing rental housing. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding outreach to housing developers. 
Ms. Srivastava reported developers were concerned regarding requirements 
and wanted flexibility in zoning tools.  The Retail Preservation Ordinance was 
a challenge for some projects.   
Mr. Lait advised that Staff was engaged with 15-20 property owners regarding 
moderation of development standards for residential projects. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the methodology. 
Ms. Srivastava explained that the first step was development of prototypes 
and then identification of zoning districts in which multifamily development 
was most likely to occur.  Next, she looked at FAR and height regulations and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
the building prototype under the existing zoning regulations.  The pro forma 
analysis was quite common. 
Council Member Kou asked if Staff explored an ability to break even in an 
Inclusionary Housing Project. 
Ms. Srivastava related that the analysis explored the likelihood of projects with 
different levels of inclusionary units being built. 
Council Member Kou asked if Staff investigated the breakeven point for BMR 
percentage. 
Ms. Srivastava noted the analysis found development under a 15 percent 
inclusion requirement was challenging.  The Impact Fee for rental housing was 
designed to mitigate the impact of market-rate housing on the need for 
affordable housing.  The analysis was applied to individual projects. 
Mayor Fine requested a characterization of Palo Alto's development standards 
in comparison to other cities' development standards and for the likelihood of 
new housing occurring in Palo Alto compared to other cities. 
Ms. Srivastava related that Palo Alto's height limits were lower than in other 
cities, which affected the amount of development.  She did not know if other 
cities adopted a Retail Preservation Ordinance.  Some cities imposed lower 
parking requirements for areas near transit. 
Mayor Fine asked if the Housing Incentive Program (HIP) increased the 
likelihood of condominium development in the Commercial Downtown-
Community (CD-C) zoning district. 
Ms. Srivastava answered yes.   
Mayor Fine remarked that housing development would not occur under the 
current regulations.  Adjusting development standards increased the 
likelihood of housing development.  He requested Staff comment regarding 
reducing retail and parking requirements for housing projects. 
Mr. Lait reported the analysis considered one parking space per unit.  The 
retail requirement was the retention of up to 1,500 square feet, and no parking 
was required for 1,500 square feet.   
Mayor Fine commented that the analysis and report provided the data the 
Council needed to encourage housing production. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested the rationale for not analyzing ownership 
housing for incomes less than 100-120 percent of Average Median Income 
(AMI) and for not analyzing the Palmer Fix for rentals at 100-120 percent AMI. 
Mr. Lait stated the Code required 100-120 percent AMI.  Reducing income 
below moderate impacted the project's feasibility. 
Ms. Srivastava added that she wanted to be consistent with the housing 
Impact Fee for very low, low, and moderate incomes. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked how the net present value of the land and building 
factored into the models.   
Ms. Srivastava related that the yield on cost was based on a stabilized net 
operating income.  The analysis did not look at an investment over time. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the portion of the Motion pertaining to the Palmer 
Fix was before the Council. 
Mr. Lait answered yes. 
Council Member Kniss requested the construction date of the last multifamily 
building.   
Mr. Lait remarked that the largest and most recent multifamily development 
was Wilton Court. 
Council Member Kniss asked if developers typically used Planned Community 
(PC) zoning to develop affordable housing. 
Mr. Lait replied yes. 
Council Member Kniss asked about the number of housing units in the pipeline. 
Mr. Lait indicated 114 units, including Wilton Court, were entitled but not built.  
Excluding Wilton Court, about 55 housing units were in the queue. 
Council Member Kniss asked Mr. Hechtman to comment. 
Bart Hechtman, Planning and Transportation Commission advised that the PTC 
unanimously supported amending the inclusionary requirement to 20 percent 
for both ownership  and rental housing after the PTC understood the incentives 
that were able to achieve the requirement.  The PTC wanted to explore 
parking, ground-floor retail, FAR, building height and economic participation 
by the City.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Council Member Cormack felt building height was important to many members 
of the community, but the Council was able to apply different rules to different 
areas.  The mix of bedroom counts was relevant to the discussion.  The Council 
was able to decide to move in different directions for ownership and rental 
housing.  She inquired whether the PTC was concerned with FAR and height 
limit. 
Mr. Hechtman advised that the PTC did not place limits on the levers.  FAR 
and height limit were mentioned along with density and funding participation. 
Council Member Cormack inquired regarding the decision to utilize 1,500 
square feet for retail. 
Mr. Lait stated it was based on the HIP. 
Council Member Cormack asked if housing had been developed with a parking 
requirement of one space per unit. 
Mr. Lait answered yes. 
Council Member Filseth requested the number of cars registered in Palo Alto. 
Mr. Lait indicated data from 2018 indicated 47,000 and data from the 
Department of Motor Vehicles indicated 57,000. 
Council Member Filseth commented that the Council should carefully consider 
and manage tradeoffs.  He utilized the consultant's spreadsheet to calculate 
various changes.   
Council Member Kou remarked that incentives for housing development were 
basically subsidies for developers.  She referred to the loss of housing units 
at the President Hotel and replacement of those units.  The Council failed at 
preserving and protecting housing.  The analysis opposed the Sustainability 
and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP). 
Mayor Fine noted a 25 percent inclusionary requirement may work in San 
Francisco, but buildings were larger in San Francisco.  Parking was a sensitive 
topic in Palo Alto.  Studies of parking for multifamily buildings found that 
multifamily buildings were about 40 percent overparked.  If parking ratios 
were high, the building was going to have to be taller to accommodate both 
housing and parking.  He disagreed with the supposition that the City was 
doing well in housing production.  The President Hotel was not a BMR Project 
and was 80 feet tall with 12 parking spaces.  He inquired whether the PTC 
anticipated exploring factors that could achieve a 20 percent inclusionary 
requirement. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Mr. Hechtman answered yes, but with funding for consultants. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to: 
A. 
Maintain the inclusionary housing requirements at 15 percent for 
ownership housing units and retain the housing impact fee for rental 
housing projects;  
B. 
Direct Staff and the Planning and Transportation Commission to explore 
possible zoning amendments or other factors that could support a future 
20 percent inclusionary requirement for ownership and rental housing 
while recognizing that such analysis will be constrained without funding 
for additional consultant resources; and 
C. 
Direct Staff to return with adjustments to parking and retail standards 
in a manner consistent with this analysis. 
Mayor Fine related that Subpart C was based on the Staff Report.  The analysis 
demonstrated that retail and parking requirements were the main 
impediments to achieving a 15 percent inclusionary requirement.  The City 
was not meeting their Comprehensive Plan targets for housing.  Additional 
housing was good for the community and helped the City meet their regional 
obligations. 
Council Member Kniss asked if the PTC was able to conduct analyses without 
funding. 
Mr. Hechtman did not believe Staff could provide the breadth of analyses the 
PTC contemplated. 
Council Member Kniss suggested the Motion reflect an attempt to fund 
analyses.   
Mayor Fine inquired regarding use of PTC Commissioners and Staff to conduct 
analyses. 
Mr. Lait reported Staff had anticipated working with the PTC to narrow choices 
before seeking funding for a consultant.   
Mr. Shikada concurred. 
Council Member Kniss felt some of the standards had to change. 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted the analyses were conducted prior to COVID-19 and 
looked at CD-C and Community Service (CS) zones.  The report did not state 
20 percent was not able to be achieved but changes were needed.  He inquired 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
whether the funding in Subpart B referred to funding for a consultant or to 
City contributions as an additional lever. 
Mayor Fine responded funding for a consultant to conduct analyses. 
Vice Mayor DuBois did not believe the community wanted to increase the 
height limit; therefore, other factors needed to be analyzed.  Housing 
production was currently market rate.  The Council needed to set firm 
requirements for inclusionary housing.  He believed the City needed to 
eliminate In-Lieu and Impact Fees and institute an inclusionary requirement 
for rental housing.  Most projects with affordable housing offered rental units.  
The consultant's report found a property owner's best financial decision was 
to pay the In-Lieu Fee, pay the Impact Fee, and not develop inclusionary 
housing.  Boulder, Colorado adopted a 20 percent inclusionary requirement in 
2000 and later increased it to 25 percent with a goal of affordable housing 
comprising 10 percent of housing stock.  He hoped the Council would revise 
Subpart A to 20 percent. 
Mayor Fine explained that new houses were expensive because they were new 
and rare.  He was not going to support eliminating In-Lieu Fees.  Setting a 
goal for affordable units without funding subsidies or allowing bigger buildings 
was going to be pointless.   
Council Member Kou remarked that the In-Lieu Fee was not enough to 
incentivize development of BMR units.  The Impact Fee was the way to 
incentivize the building of affordable units.  Land prices were elastic, and it 
was not considered in the study.  This kind of Motion actually made land more 
expensive.   
Mayor Fine clarified that land was uniquely inelastic because it had an inverse 
relationship to price. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff interpreted Subpart B as allowing 
different rules for different areas of the City. 
Mr. Lait replied yes. 
Council Member Filseth proposed parking standards consider demand for 
parking.  The study concerned the economics of developers.  He wanted to 
see holism prior to changing parking and retail standards. 
Mayor Fine requested clarification of holism. 
Council Member Filseth wanted analyses to consider changes to multiple 
factors and to combinations of factors in order to achieve inclusionary rates.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Mayor Fine believed Subpart B addressed holism.  Subpart C applied to the 
current standard of 15 percent and was based on the report finding parking 
and retail as the levers most likely to affect development. 
Council Member Filseth stated it had to do with the amount of money a 
developer could make from a project, not the number of cars in the building.   
Mayor Fine reiterated that an earlier study found multifamily buildings were 
overparked, and the Council would not reduce the parking requirements. 
Council Member Filseth understood the Council had reduced parking 
requirements to be consistent with the Fehr & Peers Study, which pertained 
to parking demand. 
Mr. Shikada suggested the proposed analyses would consider the community's 
desire to modify facts and boundaries for factors.   
Council Member Filseth was not interested in adjusting parking standards 
without understanding parking demand.  He did not accept the idea that 
limiting parking reduced the number of cars.   
AMENDMENT:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to maintain inclusionary housing requirements at 15 percent for 
ownership housing units; and direct Staff to return with a proposal to replace 
the housing impact fee for rental housing with an inclusionary requirement.  
Vice Mayor DuBois remarked that shifting to an inclusionary rate for rental 
housing was logical and requested the rationale for not doing so.   
Council Member Filseth advised that the focus should be increasing BMR 
housing.  In theory, the Impact Fee and the inclusionary requirement should 
have the same effect on developer economics.  The Affordable Housing Fund 
was to continue to be funded with impact fees from commercial projects.   
Mayor Fine indicated the analysis found an inclusionary requirement for rental 
housing was not feasible.  Nonprofit affordable housing developers supported 
the imposition of In-Lieu Fees.  The Amendment essentially implemented the 
Palmer fix.   
Vice Mayor DuBois understood the consultant had stated the analyses did not 
include removing the Impact Fee.   
Mr. Lait reported an inclusionary requirement and an Impact Fee were not 
assessed on the same project.  Currently, only an Impact Fee was assessed 
on rental housing development because the City did not have an inclusionary 
requirement for rental housing.  State law allowed a 15 percent inclusionary 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
requirement.  A Feasibility Study was needed to consider increasing the 
percentage above 15.  The study had examined 15, 20, and 25 percent 
inclusionary requirements for apartment buildings and found the likelihood of 
development varied.   
Mayor Fine stated the Amendment would make rental projects not likely to 
occur.   
Vice Mayor DuBois explained that the Amendment allowed Staff to propose a 
requirement for less than 15 percent. 
Mayor Fine advised that the study used a baseline of no requirement. 
AMENDMENT FAILED:  3-4 Cormack, Fine, Kniss, Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Kou no  
Council took a break at 9:56 P.M. and returned at 10:11 P.M. 
9. 
Discussion and Direction to Staff on Housing Affordability Requirements 
for Projects Proposed Under the Planned Home Zoning (Planned 
Community Zoning). This Action is Exempt From the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) in Accordance With CEQA Guidelines 
15061(b)(3). 
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning and Development Services reported in 
February 2020 the Council approved reusing the Planned Community (PC) 
process for housing and mixed-use housing projects only with the caveats that 
the project had to meet a 20 percent inclusionary requirement and the project 
had to produce more housing than net new commercial jobs.  Staff engaged 
with property owners who were interested in the Planned Home Zoning (PHZ) 
concept.  Option 1 provided a spread of housing units across income levels.  
The City had to provide more concessions to obtain housing units at the very-
low and low-income levels.  Option 2 followed the State Density Bonus Law 
model.  Unlike Options 1 and 2, Option 3 applied to rental housing projects 
only.  Option 3 imposed impact fees and a 10 percent inclusionary 
requirement.  Option 4 allowed the development of two housing projects, a 
100 percent Affordable Housing Project and a Market-Rate Housing Project 
and required units in the two projects to be equivalent and affordable units to 
be available first.  He reviewed the calculation of housing units and jobs 
produced.   
Becky Sanders expressed concern that the PHZ would alter protections for 
residential areas.  PHZ requirements had to be enforced.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Rebecca Eisenberg remarked that the ratio of jobs to housing for the lowest 
income level was 7:1 rather than 3.5:1.  Since 2019, the City permitted 43 
very low income housing units toward the requirement of 691.  Perhaps the 
Council regretted not proceeding with the Business Tax.   
Matt Bryant suggested the plans violated many building codes, and Staff was 
recommending rezoning residential parcels to commercial.  The existing 
zoning standards provided enough housing to meet the need.   
Gail Price, Palo Alto Forward supported offering developers a range of options 
for development of low-income housing.  Policies and zoning regulations had 
to be modified to support housing construction.   
Curtis Smolar commented that the City was failing to provide housing, and 
government monies were available for affordable housing. 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted developers preferred paying In-Lieu Fees.  The 
Council wanted housing units, not In-Lieu Fees.  A New York Times article 
indicated the average office space per worker was 126 square feet.  The 
parking standards required four parking spaces per 1,000.  He inquired 
regarding Staff's selection of the data source for 3.4 users per 1,000 square 
feet. 
Mr. Lait explained that Staff used Census data to look at the number of 
employed residents.  The jobs per 1,000 number was taken from the data 
source utilized for the Comprehensive Plan analyses.  He noted that the 
Council may direct Staff to utilize a different data source. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if data from the Santa Clara Valley Transportation 
Authority (VTA) Congestion Management Plan was used for the traffic analysis 
in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Mr. Lait answered yes.   
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested the issue was not traffic but the number of 
people in a building and where they lived. 
Mr. Lait noted the Congestion Management Plan provided data for employees 
per square foot.   
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted data specific to Palo Alto.  Most industry reports 
seemed to indicate a much higher density than 3.4 per 1,000.  He inquired 
whether the Finance Committee would consider an Affordable Housing Tax.   
Mr. Lait promised to review the Council Motion and work with Staff to bring 
the item to the Finance Committee.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Ed Shikada, City Manager added that a significant amount of work would be 
required to prepare a discussion for the Finance Committee. 
Council Member Kniss commented that the Council had prioritized housing 
multiple times.  Yet, housing production had not occurred.  She inquired 
whether developers of affordable housing leveraged City funding for affordable 
housing projects.  She recalled the development of a Housing Project in the 
300 block of Emerson and a corresponding development of four Below-Market-
Rate (BMR) units across the street.   
Mr. Lait advised that the City was a funding source for nonprofit developers of 
affordable housing.  Those developers leveraged City funding with other 
sources and tax credits.  Option 4 was attractive because of the possibility of 
the affordable housing building providing more units. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether a version of Option 1 was 
embedded in Option 2. 
Mr. Lait responded yes. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Option 4 would remove the City from 
affordable housing development. 
Mr. Lait explained that the developer would apply for the PHZ, request zoning 
concessions and fulfill the inclusionary requirement at a different site.  The 
City was to be involved in review of the development. 
Council Member Cormack noted many reasons in support of affordable housing 
integrated with market-rate housing, but Option 4 created more housing units 
and allowed the developer to pursue funding sources. 
Mr. Lait concurred.   
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of Option 3. 
Mr. Lait reported a property owner had consulted Staff, reviewed constraints 
on his property, and found he was able to fulfill a 10 percent inclusionary 
requirement.  Building 10 percent inclusionary housing and paying In-Lieu 
Fees provided about 25 percent inclusionary housing, units at the very low 
income level, and funding for the Affordable Housing Fund.  After talking with 
local developers, he understood many factors affected developers' decisions.  
One option or another for developing affordable housing was better able to 
relate to those factors.   
Council Member Cormack questioned whether the quantity of units needed to 
be a concern. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Mayor Fine indicated quantity was a concern in that it helped the City meet 
local and regional goals.  He requested the reasons for Staff proposing Option 
1 independent of Option 2 if it was possible to be part of Option 2. 
Mr. Lait advised that it was an option if the Council did not want the weighted 
approach of Option 2. 
Mayor Fine asked if the PHZ applied to both sites in Option 4.   
Mr. Lait reported the main site was eligible for PHZ incentives.  The secondary 
site for affordable housing had to comply with zoning standards.   
Mayor Fine asked if a developer was able to propose an office project under 
the PHZ and affordable housing on the secondary site. 
Mr. Lait clarified that the main site hosted office and market-rate housing while 
the secondary site hosted affordable housing.  The project had to comply with 
the jobs/housing requirement.  Conceivably, a couple of developers were able 
to combine their projects to provide affordable housing under the PHZ. 
Mayor Fine asked if VTA ratios were utilized in other analyses. 
Mr. Lait indicated the Office of Transportation used VTA data, but that data 
was possibly more related to traffic analysis.   
Vice Mayor DuBois believed the weighting factors for Option 2 were incorrect 
such that the City was to compete against itself.  If a developer was motivated 
by profit, the most attractive option was to build a few units at the lowest 
affordability level.  The 1.9 weighting factor provided the minimum value to 
the public at the least cost for the developer.  In a 100-unit condominium 
project, Option 1 created the highest public benefit.  In Option 2, the 
developer was to receive PHZ incentives but provided 10 percent inclusionary 
housing.  Option 1 provided units at different income levels and a quantifiable 
public benefit.   
Mr. Lait reported Staff was not going to accept a project that provided less 
than 15 percent inclusionary housing.  In Vice Mayor DuBois' example, the 
project had to provide a weighted average of 20 percent and the minimum 
standard of 15 percent for Staff to accept it. 
Vice Mayor DuBois questioned giving incentives to developers for complying 
with the requirement to provide 15 percent inclusionary housing.   
Mr. Lait advised that the City's BMR program did not address very low and low 
income housing.  Development of affordable housing at the low and very low 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
income levels was typically relegated to nonprofit developers.  Staff was 
proposing incentives to obtain affordable housing at the lowest levels.   
Vice Mayor DuBois expressed concern about balancing incentives with 
production. 
Mr. Lait related that there was a major difference between requiring 15 
percent at moderate income and 15 percent at very low income.  With a 
Council prescreening, the Council was able to determine whether the 
requested incentives were worthwhile. 
Vice Mayor DuBois preferred Options 1 and 4. 
Mr. Lait explained that the proposal was an attempt to eliminate negotiations 
with developers.  If a proposed project did not meet the qualifications, it was 
not going to qualify for the PHZ.  If it did meet the qualifications, Staff would 
entertain an application for the project.   
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to:  
A. 
Endorse an approach that offers a menu of options to home builders to 
meet the 20 percent inclusionary requirement for “planned home 
zoning” projects; and  
B. 
Affirm direction regarding the calculation for determining the number of 
housing units required to offset net new jobs created by a planned home 
zoning project. 
Council Member Kniss was pleased with Staff's direction on this and 
consultation with developers.  This was another opportunity to achieve 
affordable housing.   
Mayor Fine indicated that the PHZ would be one more tool.  Offering a menu 
of options was smart.   
Council Member Cormack appreciated a suite of options and believed flexibility 
was important.  Mr. Lait's due diligence seemed to suggest the options were 
to result in the construction of housing.  There had not been any suggestions 
for alternative jobs/housing ratios.   
Council Member Filseth had been hoping the inclusionary requirement would 
be more than 20 percent, but it was a tradeoff with the incentives.  The options 
provided some structure for Staff and developers. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  09/21/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois remarked that the Council had worked to increase housing 
production.  He was going to be much more excited about options for 100 
percent housing.  He expressed concern about incentives and using VTA data.   
Council Member Kou related that the inclusionary requirement should be 
considerably higher if the public benefit was affordability.  All this zoning was 
going to increase the price of land.  The VTA jobs/housing ratio did not 
compute. 
MOTION PASSED:  4-3 DuBois, Filseth, Kou no 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Kniss asked if anyone planned to attend the League of 
California Cities conference. 
Vice Mayor DuBois answered yes.   
Ed 
Shikada, 
City 
Manager 
indicated 
the 
International 
City/County 
Management Association (ICMA) conference was underway. 
Mayor Fine advised that the Council was going to see an Agenda Item for the 
conference.  He joined Supervisors Simitian and Chavez and mayors in 
requesting local health providers provide COVID-19 testing to the public.   
Council Member Kniss reported the County of Santa Clara (County) was 
planning to impose a fine on healthcare providers who refused to provide 
testing.   
Vice Mayor DuBois added that healthcare providers were not denying testing 
but making testing difficult.  He requested the City Manager provide guidance 
for Halloween activities. 
Mr. Shikada indicated Staff was awaiting the County's suggestions for 
alternative events or activities.  If the Council wished, Staff could present an 
Agenda Item. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested Staff plan or recommend Halloween events. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned in honor of the late Supreme Court 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsberg at 11:27 P.M. 
