CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 36 
 Special Meeting 
 
May 26, 2020 
 
 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date via virtual 
teleconference at 1:03 P.M. 
 
Present:  
Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka  
 
Absent: 
  
 
Oral Communications 
 
Jonathan Erman indicated that the Zoom ID numbers were listed wrong on 
the website.  He advised the City Council (Council) to tone down their 
competitiveness when enacting new policies because that policy may already 
be effective in the County or State. 
 
Kathy Jordan expressed that other cities and the State were instituting staff 
and labor take a 15 to 20 percent pay cut or furlough to assist in meeting 
their City’s needed Budget cuts.   
 
Monica Yeung reported that there was no street cleaning sign in 
Professorville.  At the intersection of Bryant Street and Lincoln Avenue, there 
was a high number of accidents and she suggested a traffic circle be 
installed. 
Action Items 
 
1. 
City Manager's Fiscal Year 2021 Proposed Operating and Capital 
Budget and Municipal Fee Schedule Wrap-up, and Adoption of an 
Ordinance Amending Section 2.04.360 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code 
to Allow Council Members a Salary Waiver Option.  
Mayor Fine emphasized that the main issues the City Council (Council) 
needed to decide on were: how to deal with the short-term Parking Lot items 
and the Ordinance that recommended that Council Members waive their 
monthly stipend.  All emails exchanged between Council Members were 
posted on the Agenda.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Ed Shikada, City Manager affirmed that the Council and Staff were making 
tough decisions when it came to budget cuts and he appreciated all the 
public comments that were sent in.  Essential services were to continue.  He 
gave an overview of the past several months.  On March 26th, 2020 Staff 
brought forward a Work Plan on how to deal with the budget within the 
context of the Shelter-in-Place Order.  On May 4th, 2020 Council adopted 
revenue assumptions that reflected a $39 million General Fund (GF) deficit.  
Between May 11 to May 13, 2020 the Council discussed the proposals and 
provided preliminary direction to Staff regarding which cuts were to move 
forward.  Staff brought those recommendations forward to Council and were 
seeking additional direction.  On June 22, 2020, Staff was to bring back 
specific follow-up actions that reflected all the budgetary moves that needed 
to be in place for the new Fiscal Year (FY) 2020-2021 Budget.  Built into the 
budget were several unknowns, including Tax Revenue Receipts, transition 
costs to implement service level reductions, the Shelter-in-Place Order’s 
impacts, social distancing and safety modifications and their impacts and 
investments necessary for the Coronavirus (COVID-19).  Staff’s Proposed 
Budget adjustments reflected Council’s direction, which included $3 million 
in expense savings due to compensation reductions of management and 
unrepresented professional employees, implementation of cost-recovery, 
additional costs for expected responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and 
Reserve Funds for outstanding liabilities.  He concluded that Staff was 
recommending restoration of operational hours at College Terrace Library, 
Teen Services, the Art Center, Children’s Theatre and building inspections.   
Kiely Nose, Chief Financial Officer and Director of Administrative Services 
acknowledged that there were several balancing strategies that the Council 
was able to move forward with.  These budget strategies included 
eliminating the Innovation Fund, Council Contingency and Special Events 
Funds, reduce the GF transfer to the Capital Improvement Project (CIP) 
Budget from $7.6 million to $6 million and reserve that reduction for the 115 
Pension Trust contribution.  She suggested opening the Junior Museum and 
Zoo (JMZ) with a new Entrance Fee, restore the Long-Range Planning and 
Housing Program, identify an additional $1 million in general CIP expense 
reductions, revisit Building and Fire Inspection Budget adjustments, and 
include a partial restoration of several key service areas that were provided 
to the public.  Some of those restorations included hiring civilians in the 
Police Department, operating all City libraries but on a reduced schedule and 
maintaining outdoor recreational areas.  The recommended balancing 
strategy assumed $196.8 million in revenues and $195.9 million in expenses 
with a surplus of $839,000.  Staff was seeking direction from Council on how 
to allocate the surplus.  The Budget strategy resulted in a loss of 74 Full-
Time Equivalent (FTE) position reductions and 26 Part-Time positions.  Of 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
the 74 FTE positions recommended, 34 of those positions were filled, leaving 
41 vacant.  In terms of part-time positions, a 26 position reduction of over 
100 employees were being impacted.  She moved onto Citywide expense 
adjustments, 
which 
now 
included 
management 
and 
professional 
unrepresented group: compensation resulting in $5.5 million across all funds 
was suggested; a reduced Capital Transfer of $18.4 million; reductions 
connected to the Cubberley Lease with a net amount of $2.5 million; and 
Internal Services Funds with a $0.8 million reduction across all funds. Other 
Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) were to continue to be funded at the 6.25 
percent Discount Rate.  New Restorations and Investments included 
$450,000 in contact tracing, $15,000 for business and community support, 
$350,000 in workplace restoration, the continuation of the 4 year 
replacement cycle for laptops, Staff the Clerk’s Office as necessary for virtual 
meetings and lastly, investing in the Litigation Reserve of $1 million.  Moving 
onto the Operating Budget for Community and Library Services.  There was 
a reduction of $4.9 million with 16.1 FTE and 21.0 part-time employees.  
The reductions included reduced operating hours, the Children’s Theatre was 
limited to two core productions, a reduction in Teen Services that were 
impacted by social distancing requirements and several other reduced 
services.  Public Safety Operating Budget included a reduction of $7.3 million 
and $1.5 million in new revenue, with a total of 35 FTE that was to be 
impacted, with 21 being sworn in positions and 2.28 part-time employees.  A 
total of $600,000 was to be restored in the Police Department, which 
included six FTE positions restored in selected departments.  For the 
Planning and Transportation Operating Budget, Staff recommended that 
Council add two FTE Building Inspector Specialists.  Public Works and 
Utilities Department included a reduction of $2.8 million by reducing the 
Tree Trimming Program, reduced Streets and Sidewalk Repair Program, 
defer vehicle replacement and maintenance, maintain a 0 percent Utility 
Rate increase for the next year and invest in the San Francisquito Creek 
Joint Powers Authority (SFJPA) Membership.  Per Council’s direction, the 
Enterprise Funds rate changes were to remain at zero except for the Fiber 
Fund, Gas Fund and Storm Drain Water Fund, which was directed to be set 
at 2.5 percent.  Internal Services and Appointees saw a reduction of $2.9 
million with 5.9 FTE positions and .96 part-time positions.  Services that 
were to continue included Police and Fire, utility services, parks and 
recreational areas, all five libraries were to remain open, health and safety 
measures maintained for neighborhood streets and sidewalks, three 
community centers were open for classes, continued support for the 
Development Center and the managing of traffic signal maintenance and 
timing was to remain open. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Mr. Shikada indicated that he and Staff reviewed the CIP Budget by 
reviewing each item individually.  One strategy that was used to reduce the 
CIP Budget by 56 percent was to reduce carryover funding in the individual 
projects to ensure that the City maintained a “keep up” funding level.  Other 
strategies were to take Shovel Ready projects and get them to a point to 
where Staff could take advantage of the favorable construction market to 
minimize near term funding of discretionary projects and ensure a steady 
flow of projects that minimized peaks and valleys in project delivery Staffing.  
He introduced Brad Eggleston who continued with the presentation regarding 
the Proposed CIP Budget reductions.  
Brad Eggleston, Director of Public Works summarized that the projects that 
were to see reductions included canceling a Design Contract for the 
Downtown Parking Project, which provided a revenue of $1 million, sidewalk 
repairs were to be reduced to only trip and fall repairs for the next 2 years, 
which provided $0.7 million, a reduction in the Capital Improvement Fund 
for the Byxbee Park Completion Project, which provided $0.3 million, only 
make safety repairs to Off-Road Pathways which provided $0.2 million and 
then rearrange funding for the Dog Park, which equated to $0.2 million.  
Mr. Shikada noted that the general themes identified in the projects was 
removing some of the GF funds and scope reductions.  
Mr. Eggleston disclosed that the City was estimated to reach full GF 
contribution to the CIP Budget by FY 2025.  There were several investment 
categories within the CIP Budget.  One category included annual recurring 
projects that kept up on maintenance throughout the City.  The next 
category included projects that provided capital maintenance for individual 
facilities or parks.  The final category included new projects for existing 
assets.  Major projects that were recommended to be continued included the 
Public Safety Building, Fire Station 4 design, 101 Bike and Pedestrian Bridge, 
park 
investments, 
grade 
separation 
planning 
and 
Airport 
Apron 
Reconstruction.  
Ms. Nose summarized that Staff was seeking direction on the overall 
Proposed Operating and Capital Budget, Municipal Fee Schedule and 
adoption of the Ordinance amending Section 2.04.360 of the Municipal Code.  
She advised Council to discuss what to do with the surplus of $839,000 and 
short-term Parking Lot items.  
Mayor Fine affirmed that the Operating Budget paid for services and the 
Capital Budget referred to infrastructure.  Due to the pandemic, instead of 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
transferring the normal $32 million to the Infrastructure Fund, the Council 
chose to transfer $14 million.  He emphasized that all CIP Projects were 
important and were not being eliminated but differed to future years.  The 
new budget reflected Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security  
(CARES) Funding, including new COVID-19 expenses.  He encouraged the 
Council to make decisions on the Parking Lot items and allocate the surplus.  
Council Member Kniss requested clarification on why there was a Staff 
recommendation to increase the Capital Budget by a net total of $23.7 
million and how that tied in with the Capital Improvement Fund Expenditure 
table that was included in the Council’s April, 2020 Packet. 
Ms. Nose reported that the table from the April 2020 Council Packet showed 
a spike in Capital Expenditures for FY 2021 but that table was going to be 
amended. She explained that there was still going to be a spike because the 
Public Safety Building was included.  
Mr. Shikada noted that a key point was that it was a small portion of the 
overall CIP Budget that contained General Funds as a part of the 
appropriation.  
Council Member Filseth disclosed that $1 million was missing from the 
Capital Budget for Fire Station 4 in FY 2021.  He requested to know the 
amount of funding designated for the Transportation Management 
Association (TMA). 
Ms. Nose answered that TMA was funded from the Downtown Parking Fund 
at $750,000. 
Council Member Filseth believed the TMA could be funded for less.  He asked 
how much the Embarcadero Road Shuttle and the Cross-town Shuttle were 
going to cost. 
Ms. Nose reported that the $1 million for Fire Station 4 was spread out over 
FY 2022 and FY 2023.  In terms of the shuttles, the Cross-town Shuttle cost 
roughly $380,000, and the Embarcadero Road Shuttle cost roughly 
$158,000. 
Council Member Cormack reiterated that the City transferred $15.3 million 
from the GF to the Capital Fund for the last FY and the FY 2020-2021 Budget 
proposed a transfer of $5 million.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Ms. Nose confirmed that was correct and that was the base level transfer. 
Council Member Tanaka preferred that the Council Members and the public 
have access to the spreadsheets that were within the document. 
Mr. Shikada believed that was poor placement of Staff resources and doing 
the additional analysis was not a priority.  
Council Member Tanaka said he did not agree with keeping the cycle of 
replacing laptops every 4 years. 
Mr. Shikada responded that some laptops ran on Windows 7 and caused a 
security concern.  A constant discipline regarding replacement was important 
because it ensured that there was not a surge replacement.   
Council Member Tanaka restated that there was no difference between a 
laptop purchased last year and a brand-new laptop in terms of processor 
speed. 
Ms. Nose specified that Staff had suggested increasing the replacement cycle 
of laptops to 5 years or longer.  
Darren Numoto, Director of Information Technology emphasized that 
computers replaced were 4 years or older. 
Vice Mayor Dubois wanted clarification regarding furloughs. 
Mr. Shikada mentioned that the assumption behind the estimated 10 percent 
savings did reflect a service level impact.  
Vice Mayor DuBois questioned if the 1 percent for art on the Public Safety 
building was included in the bonding of Certificate of Participation (COP). 
Ms. Nose did not believe so and mentioned it was already factored into the 
current 5 year CIP Plan. 
Vice Mayor DuBois questioned if the Public Safety Building was going to be 
bonded entirely in FY 2021 or if it was to be done in phases. 
Ms. Nose disclosed that it is more efficient if the City did one sale, but it did 
depend on the market. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois articulated that the City was going to start to pay debit 
interest and if the money was not needed, it did not make sense to spread it 
out.  In terms of capitalizing the interest for the Public Safety Building, the 
City was going to end up paying substantially more in the terms of total 
dollars.  
Ms. Nose explained that capitalizing the interest allowed the City to defer the 
payments by 12 to 18 months as well as defer 1 years’ worth of interest. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked when the California Avenue Garage was scheduled 
to be completed. 
Mr. Eggleston disclosed that Staff was working to get an updated schedule 
that reflected the COVID-19 delay.  The plan was to start the Public Safety 
Building after the garage was completed in approximately September 2020.  
Council Member Kou wanted to know what the actual dollar cuts were to 
Staff and services after subtracting the vacant positions.  
Ms. Nose restated the question as to how much was the current service level 
reduction that were attributed to vacant positions. 
Council Member Kou confirmed that was correct. 
Ms. Nose stated that she did not have that figure at this time. 
Mr. Shikada restated that the figure was the subset of the overall savings. 
Council Member Kou affirmed that was correct and wanted to know what the 
CIP deferrals were and how those impacted CIP projects. 
Mr. Shikada answered that Staff could not identify deferrals related to 
vacant positions in the CIP.  In terms of ongoing operations, there was no 
segregation between vacant positions versus filled positions, and it was 
challenging for Staff to determine those figures.   
Council Member Kou stated that the CIP had their own Reserve Fund that 
was reserved for capital spending.  There was a removal of $10.6 million 
from specific CIP projects, with $8 million redirected to other FY 2021 
Capital Projects. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Ms. Nose remarked yes, the CIP did have a reserve, but it contained a very 
nominal amount and the reserve was specific to restricted projects. 
Pat Burt commented that the crash in the Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) 
and the Capital Plan were the cause of the funding sources that were driving 
the inability to move forward with the aggressive schedule of the new 
projects.  All the ‘keep up’ items that Staff proposed to continue with were 
to be readjusted for cost savings. 
Steve Raney referred to a letter sent by Palo Alto Transportation 
Management Association on May 21, 2020 to Council which stated that the 
TMA was requesting $453,000.  He thought that piece of information needed 
to be part of the Parking Lot discussion and he requested that Council allow 
the TMA to serve the California Avenue Business District.  
Suzanne Keehn noted that the Palo Alto Museum was waiting for a long-term 
lease from Council and suggested that the money be found to restore the 
Roth Building.  
Maya Adam emphasized that the Children’s Community Theater had a huge 
impact on the mental health of children and she wished for it to be top of 
priority for funding.  
Michele Wang expressed that the Friends of the Palo Alto Children’s Theatre 
have more funding for staffing.  
Rich Green, President of the Palo Alto Museum specified that the 
rehabilitation project for the Roth Building was shovel ready and looked 
forward to discussions regarding funding with Staff. 
1-650…603/Terry Holzemer expressed that it was critical that the City keep 
moving forward on saving the Roth Building.  
Swati Goel felt that the Children’s Theatre was a very important outlet for 
children in the community and that Council should not cut its funding.  
Lydia Callaghan remarked how alarming it was to see the proposed cuts to 
the Children’s Theatre and urged the Council not to cut that.  
Becky Sanders did not want to see Human Services cut so infrastructure 
projects were able to move forward.  She appreciated that Boulware Park 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
was included in continued services but wished to see the Council act 
regarding the unhoused patrons camping in the park.  
Jeremy Erman supported more funding for the Children’s Theatre, Children’s 
Library, and the retention of the lease for the Cubberley Community Center. 
Mark Lawrence noticed that funding for the radio broadcast was proposed to 
be cut and he believed the radio reached populations that otherwise were 
not able to attend or watch Council meetings.  
Mona expressed that full funding for Youth Community Service (YCS) was 
vital to maintain youth mental health. 
Ian Jacobs summarized the unique experiences that took place at the 
Children’s Theatre and urged Council to continue funding all their programs.  
Alvin Hom supported full funding for the Children’s Theatre. 
Blake Mathews shared his experiences regarding the Children’s Theatre and 
urged Council to continue their funding. 
Linda Lenoir appreciated that the Council reinstated funding for some of the 
Teen Services Programs but urged the Council to fully fund YCS. 
Rohan Solanki wanted more funding for the Children’s Theatre. 
Katie Brown declared that the Children’s Theatre was a vital asset to the 
community and deserved full funding.  
Jennifer Jacobs did not agree with the Proposed Budget cuts to the 
Children’s Theatre and urged the Council for full funding.  
Monica Yeung Arima noted that it was important to remember the history of 
Palo Alto and wished the Council would put forward support for the Palo Alto 
History Museum. 
Jonathan Erman was worried about funding for the libraries, the Children’s 
Theatre and the JMZ.  He did not agree with the high-ticket prices for the 
JMZ.  Clarification regarding the Cross-town Shuttle was needed, and he 
believed the Seat Replacement Project at Lucie Stern Theater be differed.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Carlos Aceves worked at the Children’s Theatre for 5 years and saw the 
impact it had on the mental health of children.  The Council needed to fully 
fund the theater. 
David Foster supported more productions at the Children’s Theatre and full 
funding.  
Eve DeMarzo summarized her experiences at the Children’s Theatre and 
encouraged Council to fully fund all their programs.  
Hal Mickelson spoke on behalf of the Palo Alto History Museum and stated 
that the project was shovel ready and could be funded by Impact Fees. 
Karen Kwan, Director of Development for the Palo Alto Art Center 
Foundation gave thanks to the Council for continued support but asked that 
they maintain adequate funding for the Center.  
Council took a break at 3:57 P.M. and returned at 4:12 P.M. 
Mayor Fine commented that Staff and Council responded to public comments 
with the inclusion of partial restoration of key community services in the 
budget.  He advised Council to discuss the short-term Parking Lot items first 
which included management of attrition to Police and Fire, funding for the 
TMA, funding for City Council minute transcription, funding for the cost of 
printing Council materials and funding for YCS’s Youth Connectedness 
Initiative. 
Council Member Kniss supported the strategy of managing attrition to the 
Police Department.  She added that either Rinconada Library or Mitchell Park 
Library have extended hours in the evening.  
Gayathri Kanth, Director of Libraries clarified that under the current 
proposal, Mitchell Park Library would remain open until 9:00 P.M. 
Council Member Cormack was less concerned about attrition in the Police 
Department.  Concerning the TMA, she asked why the budget says 
$750,000, then it was mentioned that it be funded at $543,000 and if that 
difference was available, to add it to the surplus.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Ms. Nose explained that the funds could be used for a broad range of 
investments, but Council historically allocated the funds to be used in the 
Downtown area.  
Molly Stump, City Attorney agreed. 
Council Member Cormack reiterated that the main source of funding for YCS 
was not proposed for budget cuts. 
Ms. Nose clarified that there was a County grant and then the City matched 
that.  
Kristen O’Kane, Director of Community Services confirmed that YCS received 
funding through the Human Services Resource Allocation Process (HSRAP) 
Grant Program, which was separate from the County Match Program. 
Council Member Cormack asked when the Youth Connectedness Initiative 
was initiated. 
Ms. O’Kane replied it was established 3 years ago and confirmed YCS was 
going to be receiving 75 percent of their requested budget funding.  
Council Member Cormack prioritized printed Packets over transcribed 
minutes.  In the future, the Council needed to figure out how to get donors 
and volunteers involved in funding strategies.  She asked Staff if the Cross-
town Shuttle was the best service to use because it was utilized by many 
amongst the vulnerable population.  
Phillip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official confirmed that the Cross-town 
Shuttle was more locally serving, but there was a significant cost saving with 
the Embarcadero Road Shuttle.  From a management perspective, he agreed 
that the Cross-town Shuttle was the best service to reinstate. 
Council Member Filseth asked where the City was in terms of where the 
Budget Stabilization Reserve (BSR) needed to be. 
Ms. Nose answered that if Staff continued with the $21 million reductions 
from the BSR, the BSR was going to stand at a $25 million funding level, 
which was below the 15 percent minimum.  Staff planned to bring forward 
options to help maintain the minimum funding level for the BSR at the June 
22, 2020 meeting.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Council Member Filseth inquired how the City was going to keep the BSR 
from falling below the 15 percent minimum.  
Ms. Nose noted that City expenses decreased significantly in 2021.  
Council Member Filseth emphasized that operations were not supposed to be 
funded out of the BSR.  He inquired about what needed to be restored in the 
Community Service Department (CSD). 
Ms. O’Kane wished to see more funding restored toward Children’s Theatre 
and the Arts Center.  
Council Member Filseth agreed with Council Member Cormack regarding the 
attrition management of the Police Department.  
Council Member Kou questioned whether a phased approach could happen 
for the Children’s Theatre.  
Ms. O’Kane explained that the amount needed to be charged to participants 
needed to be very steep to get to a cost-recovery level.  Staff preferred not 
to do that, but the prospect could be explored.  
Council Member Kou inquired how much funding was cut from the Children’s 
Theatre. 
Ms. O’Kane answered 42 percent. 
Council Member Kou questioned whether the inspectors that were mentioned 
at the prior meeting were Building Inspectors or Fire Inspectors.  
Ms. Nose reported the current proposal was acquiring new Building 
Inspectors and they were not Firefighters. 
Council Member Kou remembered that at a previous meeting it was 
mentioned that several Fire Inspectors were let go.  
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning and Development Services clarified that 
the Fire Prevention Program was housed within the Planning and 
Development Services Department and the proposal was to reduce the fire 
component.  The positions were to return to the Fire Department and the 
Fire Department was then going to adjust.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Council Member Kou asked if the Fire Prevention Program was cost recovery. 
Mr. Lait answered yes.  
Ms. O’Kane interjected that the Children’s Theatre’s Expense Budget was 
usually $1.7 million and in the FY 2020-2021 Budget, it was proposed to cut 
$700,000.  
Vice Mayor DuBois appreciated the comments made by the public regarding 
Children’s Theatre.  He inquired about other homeless programs that 
remained unfunded. 
Ms. O’Kane replied that most programs were funded through the HSRAP 
Program and the HSRAP Contingency Fund.  
Vice Mayor DuBois asked what the Unhouses Program is.  
Ms. O’Kane explained that it was an agreement with the County that 
assisted people monetarily that were trying to come back into society after 
being incarcerated.  
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted a detailed schedule that showed the $88 million 
in re-appropriations. 
Ms. Nose indicated that the schedule was included in the Council’s Packet. 
Vice Mayor DuBois did not see a reasoning behind having the Planning and 
Transportation Commission (PTC) review the Capital Budget. 
Ms. Nose explained that the PTC’s review was to make sure that the Capital 
Budget followed the City’s Comprehensive Plan.  
Vice Mayor DuBois asked why the additional $600,000 allocation to the 
Police Department was being proposed for civilian positions.  
Ms. Nose explained that the idea was to keep the City’s resources at the 
most cost-effective levels so business could continue.  
Robert Jonsen, Police Chief added that there were concerns that if core 
internal Staff were eliminated, the Police Department was not going to have 
the capability to do the legal component of their job.  
Vice Mayor DuBois questioned if Staff ran scenarios on how to capitalize on 
the decreased construction costs. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Ms. Nose commented that Staff was hopeful that engineering estimates were 
going to remain on budget and construction bids were going to follow suit.   
Mr. Eggleston answered that Staff did not have a model and keeping smaller 
projects moving forward was going to help Staff understand how to bid for 
bigger projects. 
Vice Mayor DuBois wished to discuss KZSU later in the meeting.  
Council Member Tanaka thought libraries should be closed during school 
hours but continue with evening and weekend hours.  
Ms. Kanth confirmed that Staff was looking at staggering schedules and 
every library was going to be open at least one weekend day.  In terms of 
scaling back libraries hours during school hours, the libraries saw a large 
population during story times between 10:00–11:00 A.M.  
Council Member Tanaka wondered what the cost was to run shuttles during 
the morning and evening school commute hours. 
Mr. Kamhi claimed that the problem was keeping a vendor because vendors 
were requesting at least an 8 hour block of working time. 
Council Member Tanaka thought cutting the Public Art Project for the Public 
Safety Building would help with cost savings.  
Ms. O’Kane affirmed that the public art was already complete and was in 
storage waiting to be installed. 
Council Member Tanaka disclosed his concern about the California economy 
collapsing and how the City may be forced to make more drastic cuts very 
soon.  
Mr. Shikada commented that the health emergency was economically 
impacting every community differently.  
Council Member Tanaka agreed, but noted that the City relied on retail 
businesses, which were greatly impacted.  
Mayor Fine concurred with Council Member Tanaka and wished to receive 
monthly reports of estimated Sales Tax and hotel revenues.  Regarding 
public art, if the Council chose to reduce public art then the City’s Ordinance 
needed to be changed as well; the 5 year CIP Revised Plan, all projects that 
estimated a zero out expense were not going to receive funding for the next 
5 years.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Ms. Nose confirmed that was correct. 
Mayor Fine wanted to know if those projects were cancelled. 
Mr. Eggleston articulated that it depended on the project, but regarding the 
5-year plan, they were essentially cancelled. 
Mayor Fine commented that any CIP projects that was cancelled, the City 
needed to communicate those cancellations to stakeholders and interested 
parties. 
Council Member Kou questioned if positions were going to be eliminated at 
the Children’s Theatre. 
Ms. O’Kane confirmed that approximately 5 FTE’s were anticipated to be cut. 
Council Member Kou asked how that was going to affect the theatre. 
Ms. O’Kane summarized that instead of four productions the theatre was 
going to have one and only nine playhouse productions instead of the 
normal 12.  Also, reductions to educational programs and the Twilight 
Summer Concert Series needed to be cancelled for FY 2021. 
Council Member Kou declared that the cuts to the Children’s Theatre were 
concerning.  She requested more clarification regarding the Fire Prevention 
Bureau.  
Ms. Nose explained that the Fire Prevention Bureau was housed in the 
Development Center and 80 percent of those positions were fee backed.  In 
conclusion, there was a proposed reduction of two sworn inspectors and six 
sworn positions in the Fire Department. 
Council Member Kou asked if that was the number associated with the 
attrition strategy.  
Geo Blackshire, Fire Chief noted that there was one vacant position and so 
the Proposed Budget cuts impacted seven positions.  
Council Member Kou questioned why the Fire Prevention Inspectors were 
located within the Planning and Development Services Department Budget.  
Ms. Nose disclosed that different positions in the Development Center 
reported to different City Departments. 
Mr. Blackshire added that there were approximately 800 State-mandated 
inspections that needed to be completed annually.  With the cuts, 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
prioritization had to take place between State-mandated, high hazard and 
development inspections. 
Council Member Kou commented that all inspections were revenue-
generating, but the revenue went into the Planning and Development 
Services Department’s Budget. 
Mr. Blackshire confirmed that the inspections were revenue-generating. 
Mr. Lait stated that any revenue that was not building inspection related 
went to the Fire Department.  
Council Member Kou wanted to know which department received that 
money.  
Ms. Stump clarified that terms for cost recovery were the cost had to be the 
actual cost, not cost in excess.  
Council Member Kniss encouraged the Council to review fire and police cuts 
in a strategic way.  She suggested that concessions be explored to fund fire 
and police; as well as continue to keep it in the short-term Parking Lot until 
Council was able to comfortably discuss how to fund them.  
MOTION: Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka to keep the strategy to manage attrition in Police and Fire in short-
term parking until the June 22, 2020, City Council Meeting.  
Mr. Shikada reported that Staff was in positive discussions with all units 
regarding labor reductions.  
Mayor Fine clarified that the fire and police attraction strategies was not 
going to be included in the FY 2020-2021 Budget until a funding source was 
found. 
Mr. Shikada answered that was correct and Staff felt comfortable with that. 
Council Member Kniss articulated that the attrition strategy was one she 
supported, but due to the unpredictability of the year, she wanted to see 
additional time added to further the discussion regarding funding.  
Council Member Tanaka expressed that laying off employees was not a good 
thing and agreed that additional time helped the Council make the right 
decision.  He hoped negotiations would lead to shared sacrifices among the 
employees so that the City could enable not as deep of layoffs.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Council Member Filseth agreed that the Motion was a better way to get the 
expenses down versus straight layoffs. 
Vice Mayor DuBois acknowledged that payroll was the City’s biggest expense 
and there needed to be a collaboration with all the unions.  He supported the 
Motion. 
Council Member Kou specified that the community strongly voiced their 
desire to continue the public safety level of service. She supported the 
Motion. 
Mayor Fine also supported the Motion and believed it to be a smart strategy.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Mayor Fine continued to the next short-term Parking Lot item which was the 
TMA funding at $750,000; this was paid out of the Downtown Parking Fund.  
Council Member Cormack asked Staff what their recommendation was on 
where funding should go in terms of shuttles. 
Mr. Shikada interjected to say that funding for shuttles stretched to the 
Parking Funds. 
Council Member Cormack shared that the shuttle was the only public 
transportation between South Palo Alto and Downtown.   The Utilities 
Advisory Commission (UAC) recommended that Council add back in the $1 
million in offsets for natural gas. Regarding Cubberley, she inquired what 
impacts the schools were having.  
Ms. O’Kane disclosed that Staff was investigating new spaces on the City’s 
side for displaced tenants. She did not know what the School District’s plans 
where. 
Council Member Cormack wanted more information regarding the Parent 
Program and was intrigued by the idea of reserving some of the surplus for 
future month’s decisions.  
Mr. Jonsen shared that the Parent Program was connected to the School 
Resource Officer Program, but there was no funding for the program, and 
the program was going to be disbanded. 
Council Member Filseth mentioned that there were only two Code 
Enforcement positions and the budget suggested to eliminate those two 
positions.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Mr. Lait indicated that out of the three available positions, only one was filled 
and will remain to be filled.  
MOTION: Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to reduce the 
Transportation Management Association (TMA) Fund to $453,000 and use 
the savings to assist city-wide COVID-19 business support efforts. 
Vice Mayor DuBois declared that Staff should determine what programs were 
best suited for the funding.  
Mayor Fine felt that since the TMA was requesting less funding, he supported 
the recommendation and supported using it for local businesses.  
Council Member Tanaka mentioned that many comments from the public 
supported restaurants using street space.  
Mr. Shikada explained that Staff was already working on allowing 
restaurants to operate within the right of way.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired about Manzanita Works. 
Mr. Shikada answered that there were discussions between the TMA and 
Manzanita Works.  
Council Member Kniss supported the Motion.  
Council Member Cormack believed that the Motion was too broad and 
wondered if Staff interpreted the Motion as more funding should be put 
toward Business Recovery Grants.  She asked if the Motion applied to 
California Avenue. 
Mayor Fine felt the Motion was separate from the Business Grant Program 
but hoped the Motion supported public space initiatives.  
Vice Mayor DuBois did not want to specify what programs the funding should 
be used for and wanted to leave the decision up to Staff.  
Mr. Shikada understood the intent of the Motion and any proposal for how 
the funds would be spent would come back to Council for approval.  
Council Member Cormack emphasized that she did not want funds spent on 
just the Downtown District. 
Vice Mayor DuBois clarified that the Motion recommends funding be used 
Citywide. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Council Member Cormack suggested an Amendment of splitting the surplus 
between business support and restoring the shuttle. 
Vice Mayor DuBois did not support the Amendment because Staff indicated 
that they would like the extra time to formulate an On-demand 
Transportation Model. 
Mayor Fine asked if there was funding available for an on-demand shuttle 
service. 
Mr. Kamhi answered there was no funding and added that an on-demand 
shuttle service was not the most appropriate use for Parking Funds. 
AMENDMENT: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council 
Member XX for $150,000 to be used to restore shuttle service and for the 
remainder ($147,000) to assist with COVID-19 business support efforts. 
AMENDMENT FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
Council Member Kou supported the Motion and wanted to review the shuttle 
service later.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0  
Council took a break at 5:56 P.M. and returned at 6:30 P.M. 
Mayor Fine wished to discuss the City Council minute transcription next.  
Council Member Tanaka commented that it would be helpful to know how 
many employee positions were vacant in terms of positions cut.  Also, it was 
not clear if services were able to be delivered because of COVID-19 impacts.  
He wished to know what kind of efficiencies could be found.  
Mr. Shikada declared that the top line comment was that the budget was a 
plan and the budget did not reflect an expectation that nothing was going to 
change over the year.  In terms of COVID-19 impacts on services, Staff 
baked in some proposals that were going to keep services open when they 
are allowed.  In terms of vacant and filled positions, cutting vacant or filled 
positions also cut services.  
Council Member Tanaka restated that vacant positions were not listed in the 
budget tables. 
Ms. Nose concurred that they were not listed proposal by proposal.  She 
emphasized that though there was a possible vacant position in a 
department, that did not mean that the service was not being fulfilled.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Mr. Shikada wanted Council to ask Staff about specific vacant positions 
instead of using statistical information to come to an inaccurate conclusion.  
MOTION: Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to fund the City Council minutes transcription ($35,000). 
Council Member Filseth believed that the transcripts were important for 
transparency.  
Council Member Cormack inquired if there was transcription on YouTube. 
Beth Minor, City Clerk confirmed that the YouTube transcription only did 
short clips and those short clips did not work for long meetings.  
Council Member Cormack asked if there was a search feature on the  
YouTube transcript. 
Darren Numoto, Information Technology Interim Director was not familiar 
with it.  
Council Member Tanaka remarked that the YouTube transcription was free 
and suggested that every time there was a break, to pause the video, and 
YouTube transcribed the meeting up to the pause mark.  It was more 
transparent, it transcribed in real-time, was more accurate and was easier 
for the public to access. 
Ms. Minor voiced concern that it did not cover Motions.  
Vice Mayor Dubois agreed that the YouTube transcription was not available 
on long meetings. 
MOTION PASSED: 5-2 Fine, Tanaka no 
MOTION: Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to fund the cost of printing City Council materials ($35,000). 
Council Member Cormack confirmed that the printed materials helped 
Council make effective decisions.  
Council Member Tanaka remarked that if the $35,000 was spent on more 
monitors in the Council Chambers, that saved trees, and was more cost-
efficient.  
Vice Mayor DuBois disclosed that charts and tables were hard to read online 
and that was why he supported the Motion.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Council Member Kou advised that Council Members indicated that if they 
needed a hard copy or not.  
Mayor Fine commented that electronic documents were easier to use.  He 
supported the Motion but asked that the City use more electronic documents 
in the future.  
MOTION PASSED: 6-1 Tanaka no 
MOTION: Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss 
to restore funding for Youth Community Service (YCS) Youth Connectedness 
Initiative ($25,000). 
Council Member Kou believed the program to be very important and said 
there needed to be support for youth mental health and wellbeing.  
Council Member Cormack requested that the item be put into a restoration 
list because she anticipated larger budget cuts soon.  
Mr. Shikada agreed that there was funding to start the program and agreed 
that it was able to be revisited at a future time.   
Mayor Fine suggested that Council Member Cormack list items that were 
going to be pulled aside, which could be reevaluated later when more 
information was available. 
Council Member Cormack was confident that YCS had funding for the first 
semester.  She wished to fund YCS with partial restoration and reassess the 
rest of the program’s funding later in the year.     
SUBSTITUTE MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by 
Council Member XX to revisit later in the year, funding for Youth Community 
Service (YCS) Youth Connectedness Initiative ($25,000).  
Council Member Kou restated that the $50,000 provided by the City was half 
the funding and the other half was a matching grant from the County.  They 
were not going to receive funding if the City decided to cut their portion of 
the funding.  
Mr. Shikada clarified that the County money would come forward 
irrespective of the City’s funds. 
Ms. O’Kane confirmed that the County will fund the program regardless of 
whether the City contributes or not.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Council Member Kniss was concerned because the County had not finalized 
their budget.  
Council Member Cormack specified that she was concerned about the 
process the Council was taking regarding the budget and programs that are 
cut.  
SUBSTITUTE MOTION WITHDRAWN BY THE MAKER 
Council Member Kniss asked if $25,000 was already funded. 
Mayor Fine answered yes. 
Council Member Kou clarified that the Motion was to restore funding for 
YCS’s Youth Connectiveness initiative of $25,000 for a total of $50,000. 
Vice Mayor DuBois commented that the funding was separate from the YCS 
programming funds.  He did not want to risk the programs matching funds 
from the County and supported the Motion.  He also supported the idea of a 
restoration list for other items.  
Council Member Filseth agreed to moving forward with a restoration list and 
agreed this item should not be on that list. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Mr. Shikada reached out to Stanford University regarding funding for KZSU 
but did not receive a response.  
Vice Mayor DuBois wished to wait until the City heard from Stanford. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to 
leave funding for KZSU ($20,000) in the short-term parking lot until June 
22, 2020.  
Council Member Cormack wanted information regarding listeners, how 
people listened to the meeting, as well as if the station was used for 
emergency broadcasts. 
Council Member Tanaka declared that they listened to it on YouTube.  
Council Member Kou confirmed that KZSU was the emergency station for 
Palo Alto and Stanford University.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Mayor Fine wanted to know the amount left in the surplus of $839,000. 
Ms. Nose answered $744,000. 
Council Member Kou inquired about the recommendation that Staffing be 
restored in the City Clerk’s Office.  
Ms. Nose clarified that no action was required if Council agreed that there be 
no reductions in staffing in the City Clerk’s Office. 
Council Member Kou asked if all funding from the Community Development 
Block Grant (CDBG) was allocated.  
Ms. Nose answered that the CDBG allocation recipients would be brought 
forward to the Council in June 2020.  
Vice Mayor DuBois shared that in terms of Cubberley, a lot of long-time 
tenants on the school side were being displaced.  He asked if there were 
options to rent more spaces. He suggested that the opening date for the JMZ  
be determined later and that no Staff should be hired until that date was 
finalized.  He advised to keep $74,000 unallocated because he anticipated 
there to be Budget changes during the year.  Finally, any major CIP projects 
needed to be put on hold for 6 months.  
Council Member Cormack confirmed that Staff’s proposal provided flexibility 
for Council to decide if construction on the Public Safety Building was 
appropriate.  She wanted the exact numbers regarding the BSR levels. 
Ms. Nose explained that a full transfer of $20 million from the BSR for FY 
2021 was going to result in the BSR dropping to approximately $25 million. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to know how big the delta for the BSR 
was, regarding what was projected, including the 15 percent. 
Ms. Nose answered $4.5 million.  
Council Member Cormack proposed to set aside the remaining $744,000 and 
to revisit it in the fall of 2020 for community services, COVID-19 response, 
public safety and the shuttles.  She restated that if there was any help the 
City could give to the School District regarding Cubberley, that needed to 
happen. 
Council Member Kniss asked how long the surplus of $744,000 could be in 
limbo. 
Council Member Cormack determined 6 months of the FY.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Council Member Kniss inquired if contact tracing would be paid for out of the 
surplus.  
Mr. Shikada mentioned there was a separate line item within the budget 
used as a place holder for contact tracing.  
Council Member Kniss questioned if the Public Safety Building was included 
in that list. 
Council Member Cormack clarified the Public Safety departments.  
Council Member Kniss remarked that another item to add to the list were 
items involving teens and youth. 
Council Member Cormack noted that all teen and youth services were listed 
under community services.  
Dean Batchelor, Director of Utilities added that in terms of the Gas Fund for 
the carbon offset costs, Staff refunded the $1 million into the Gas Fund and 
the program was to continue in FY 2020-2021. 
Council Member Filseth concurred with all the suggestions made by Council 
Member Cormack and Council Member Kniss.  He suggested adding structure 
regarding the timeline of when the items could be revisited.   
Council Member Tanaka wanted to understand the rationale behind having 
another fund instead of putting the surplus into the BSR.  
Ms. Nose declared it was a policy call and helped with transparency if the 
Council called out what exactly should happen to the funds.  
Council Member Tanaka proposed putting the surplus dollars in the BSR. 
Council Member Kou reported that the Public Safety Building CIP was not 
shovel ready, but she wanted to know what the cost would be to get the 
project shovel ready.  There was a flaw in how Staff presented the budget to 
Council; Staff provided a broad picture but not enough individual 
components.  
Mayor Fine supported an Uncertainty Reserve and believed it to be a smart 
move.  He reminded the Council that they agreed on the goals, strategies 
and priorities before starting the budget process. 
MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to designate the remaining $744,000 of the unallocated funds into a 
“COVID-19 Uncertainty Reserve Fund” to be revisited in September 2020 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
and again in December 2020, to be used in the following areas: Community 
Services, ongoing COVID-19 Response, Public Safety Operations, and 
Shuttle Systems. 
Council Member Cormack believed it was prudent that the Council not make 
every single decision now.  
Vice Mayor DuBois liked the idea of putting the funds into the BSR.  He 
wanted to see the restoration list be a working list and suggested the One 
Percent for Art Policy be placed on hold for the next 2 years.  He did not 
support the Motion regarding its specificity and wanted to see a more 
general restoration list.   
Council Member Cormack stated that an on-going COVID-19 response 
provided a lot of flexibility.  
Council Member Filseth supported having the structure and definition in the 
Motion, but also supported the idea of it being a working list.  
Vice Mayor DuBois restated that COVID-19 response could be specific to 
impacts caused by COVID-19 and nothing else.  
Council Member Filseth suggested adding language saying “others proposed 
by Staff.” 
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed with that suggestion.  
Council Member Kniss asked how the money was accessed. 
Council Member Cormack predicted that Staff would bring forward options 
and Council would decide on those options.  
Ms. Nose added that if the items were listed as a separate reserve, then it 
would require a majority vote to move the money from the reserve to a 
specific program or project.  
Council Member Cormack suggested having a Study Session in September 
2020 before Staff brought forward actionable items because it allowed other 
Council Members and community members to bring forward items they 
wanted restored. 
Council Member Kou questioned how Staff would be reaching out to the 
community for their priorities.  
Mr. Shikada answered that Staff would do an environmental scan in August 
2020 on what was happening within the community.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Mayor Fine inquired if Staff was comfortable with the suggested timeline.  
Mr. Shikada believed the fall was a good milestone to set.  
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “…or others as proposed by 
Staff.” 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED: Council Member Cormack moved, 
seconded by Council Member Filseth to designate the remaining $744,000 of 
the unallocated funds into a “COVID-19 Uncertainty Reserve” Fund to be 
revisited in September 2020 and again in December 2020, to be used in the 
following areas: Community Services, ongoing COVID-19 response, Public 
Safety operations, and Shuttle Systems, or others as proposed by Staff.  
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED: 6-1 Tanaka no 
Ms. Minor mentioned that Staff was still working from home and she wanted 
to know if Packet printing should resume after the Stay-at-Home Order was 
lifted or if she needed to bring back Packet printing now. 
Mayor Fine summarized that Council Member Kniss, Council Member 
Cormack, Vice Mayor DuBois, Council Member Filseth and Council Member 
Kou wished to receive printed Council Packets. 
Council Member Kniss asked if Council Members should pick up their 
Packets. 
Ms. Minor answered yes.  
Council Member Cormack offered to deliver Packets.  
Ms. Stump explained that further consultation and study regarding laws had 
to take place to determine how many votes were needed to move money 
from the newly formed COIVD-19 Uncertainty Reserve. 
Mayor Fine inquired if the Council had to give direction to Staff to expand 
the TMA to California Avenue.  
Mr. Kamhi requested direction from Council. 
MOTION: Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
allow the Transportation Management Association (TMA) to expand to 
California Avenue in the upcoming year.   
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Council Member Kou reported that her yes vote for the $744,000 item was 
based on how easy it was to access the funds and she expressed that she 
was unsure now. 
Mayor Fine proposed the City Attorney and the Budget Manager provide a 
memo in the future that updated the Council and the community on how 
many votes it took to move funds from the COVID-19 Uncertainty Reserve. 
Council took a break at 8:18 P.M. and returned at 8:30 P.M. 
Ms. Stump reported that a simple majority of four votes was needed to 
reallocate funds from the COVID-19 Uncertainty Reserve. 
Mayor Fine mentioned that the remaining items that needed decisions were 
the four long-term Parking Lot items, the Council Pay Waiver Ordinance and 
a Motion to allow Staff to finalize the adopted Budget. 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to know how the One Percent for Art budget 
worked.  
Mr. Eggleston answered that it was not the total amount of every project 
and it was not for projects that were just under maintenance. A new park 
was an example of something it could be used for, but it could not be used 
for underground infrastructure projects. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to 
direct Staff to return with a temporary suspension of the One Percent for 
Public Art, for two years, and reevaluate at the mid-year budget check-in.  
Ms. Stump declared that Staff had to bring it back because the private 
program was an Ordinance and the City program was a policy.  
Council Member Kniss believed art was a baked-in part of the City’s culture 
and did not support the Motion.  
Council Member Cormack agreed with Council Member Kniss. 
Council Member Kou inquired how much the public art was going to cost for 
the Public Safety Building.  
Mr. Shikada answered $750,000. 
Council Member Tanaka supported the Motion. 
MOTION PASSED: 4-3 Cormack, Fine, Kniss no 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to keep funding for the School District. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 28 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
MOTION: Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member XX 
to fund Palo Alto Schools for $2.5 million. 
Council Member Tanaka emphasized that it did not have to be with a lease.  
 
Council Member Kou restated that the Motion was to pay the lease of $5 
million for Cubberley to the School District. 
 
Council Member Tanaka explained that the City was not solving budget 
problems by taking money from the School District. 
 
Mr. Shikada added that the School Board recently approved the new lease 
with a unanimous vote.  
 
MOTION WITHDRAWN BY THE MAKER 
 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to know what type of revenue the City could 
get if City-owned properties were rented out.  
 
MOTION: Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member XX 
to direct Staff to estimate the amount of market rent that would be collected 
for all the property owned by the City. 
 
 
MOTION FAILED DUE TO LACK OF A SECOND 
 
Council Member Tanaka asked how much it costs to upgrade laptops.  
 
Ms. Nose affirmed that the value was $780,000 with the GF component 
being $220,000.    
 
MOTION: Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member XX 
to propose that computer equipment cycles are returned to 5-year cycles.  
 
Mr. Shikada reiterated that updating laptops was vital for management and 
Staff to be able to do their jobs.  
 
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
 
Council Member Kou wanted reassurance that there was going to be no 
modifications to local zoning regulations to streamline application review. 
 
Mr. Lait claimed that the department made reductions in the consultation 
services that were used.  The Individual Review Program was not cost 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 29 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
recoverable and Staff wanted to look at where adjustments could be made 
to the Zoning Code so that more projects could be done administratively.  
Staff planned to return with recommendations to the Planning Commission 
and no action was going to be made without Council’s endorsement. There 
was to be no changes to the entitlement process. 
 
Council Member Kniss asked for exact numbers regarding cuts to the 
Children’s Theatre. 
 
Ms. O’Kane restated that one main production would be happening, the 
Playhouse Series was to be reduced to nine performances, and limited 
outreach was to be done in the School Districts.  
 
Council Member Kniss inquired how Staff saw the City functioning in the next 
6 months.  
 
Mr. Shikada hoped that Council meetings would be in-person as well as on 
Zoom.  
 
Ms. O’Kane added that the Children’s Theatre was focusing on virtual 
programming, as well as an in-person summer camp.  
 
Council Member Tanaka inquired why there was one transfer of a Police 
Lieutenant to the City Manager’s Office. 
 
Ms. Nose specified that Staff was filling areas with existing Staff where it 
was needed. 
 
Mr. Shikada added that the position was providing support to the business 
activities post-COVID-19. 
 
MOTION: Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member XX 
to keep the funding for 1.0 Police Lieutenant in the Police Department versus 
moving the position to the City Manager’s Office.  
 
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
 
Council Member Tanaka asked why Human Resources needed five positions 
dedicated to recruitment.  
 
Rumi Portillo, Director of Human Resources noted that the recruitment team 
often ran under-staffed and the department just achieved full staffing.  The 
recruitment Staff also worked on all Staff bumping and layoffs. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 30 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
MOTION: Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member XX 
to reduce the number of recruiters in the Human Resources Department 
from 5 to 2.  
 
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
 
Mayor Fine moved the Council onto future follow-up long term Parking Lot 
items.  
MOTION: Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to direct Staff to explore changing the delivery of services from a 
dominant fire-oriented model to a dominant medical-oriented model. 
 
Mayor Fine supported the Motion.  
 
Council Member Cormack supported the Motion.  
 
Council Member Kou wanted to hear from the Fire Department regarding 
what the best model was for them. 
 
Mr. Blackshire clarified that 67 to 68 percent of calls were medical, not 99 
percent, and there were a substantial number of calls that were fire-related 
calls.  
 
Council Member Kniss expressed that the medical model needed to be 
studied and Staff needed to reach out to other cities that use a medical 
model. 
 
Council Member Kou remarked that it was important to look at all the 
services the Fire Department supplied. 
 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change the Motion to read, “…to explore 
changing emergency services delivery…” 
 
Council Member Tanaka believed Fire Prevention was a different topic. 
 
Council Member Kniss supported the Amendment. 
 
Mr. Shikada explained that with an expanded scope, it could result in a very 
significant study to the point that it was going to take City resources. He 
suggested working with the Fire Chief to ensure that the scope was 
consistent with what the Council had in mind.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 31 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
 
Mr. Blackshire agreed that the Fire Department was going to need additional 
resources for such a study. 
 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED: Council Member Tanaka moved, 
seconded by Council Member Kniss to direct Staff to explore changing 
emergency services delivery from a dominant fire-oriented model to a 
dominant medical-oriented model.  
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED: 7-0 
 
Mayor Fine moved the discussion to the Roth Building and $1 million from 
Impact Fees. 
 
MOTION: Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth to 
direct the Finance Committee to evaluate the ability to fund the Roth 
Building renovations through the General Fund (not to exceed $1 million) or 
impact fees, with the preference for impact fees. 
 
Vice Mayor DuBois summarized that the process was following a prior laid 
out path that Council had put into place, but with updated information. 
 
Council Member Filseth agreed that the Finance Committee should discuss it.  
 
Council Member Cormack asked if the item was still on the Finance 
Committee’s Work Plan.  
 
Mr. Shikada confirmed.  
 
Council Member Cormack inquired if the only change was the use of Impact 
Fees. 
 
Ms. Nose shared that the two changes were the Impact Fees as well as the 
GF contributions. 
 
Council Member Cormack did not support the Motion due to the instruction 
on the preference of Impact Fees because she thought those funds could be 
used for facilities that were already being occupied. 
 
Council Member Kniss did not support the Motion because it included 
language regarding the GF.  
 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 32 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Council Member Kou clarified that the building was going to be a community 
space and believed the appropriate thing to do was have the Finance 
Committee discuss it.  
 
Council Member Tanaka observed that the new Motion was more restrictive 
than the original path that initially sent the Roth Building Item to the Finance 
Committee. 
 
Mr. Shikada described the Motion as more specific instead of restrictive.  
 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to understand the rationale behind having 
another Motion that restricted options. 
 
Vice Mayor DuBois explained that $1 million from the FY 2020-2021 Budget, 
plus Impact Fees were able to move the project forward quicker.  
 
Mayor Fine wished to move forward with the original path that was approved 
in March 2020 and he did not want to move Impact Fee funding away from 
other projects. 
 
Council Member Filseth questioned if the item would still go to the Finance 
Committee if the Motion on the table was voted down. 
 
Mr. Shikada confirmed that it would still go to the Finance Committee for 
discussion.  
MOTION FAILED: 2-5 Cormack, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Tanaka no 
Vice Mayor DuBois shared that the request was to see if there could be no 
transfers from the GF over several years for the JMZ. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to 
direct Staff to return with a report or item on the Junior Museum and Zoo 
and what it would look like to eliminate the General Fund subsidy through a 
fully cost recoverable program. 
Council Member Kniss did not think the Motion was a good move for the 
Council. 
Council Member Cormack believed the Motion was a good idea, but not at 
the current time, and suggested revisiting the Motion when the JMZ was 
open.  
 
Council Member Filseth asked if the Motion required a lot of Staff work and 
would that work show any new unknowns. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 33 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
 
Mr. Shikada affirmed that it would be a lot of work but reviewing the JMZ in 
the current environment was not out of the question.  He added that hiring 
additional Staff for a March 2021 opening was going to take place before the 
end of the calendar year. 
 
Ms. O’Kane expected a good turn out at the opening and added that Staff 
hiring was going to take place well before the opening.  
 
Mr. Shikada remarked that there was not going to be a report until Staff was 
hired and the museum was open.  
 
Ms. O’Kane added that in order for the JMZ to be full cost recovery, the 
entrance price had to be $23 per ticket and Staff had reservations regarding 
that amount.  
 
Council Member Kou inquired if the goal was to eliminate the GF subsidy in 
the future. 
 
Mr. Shikada recalled that the path started several years ago was to examine 
spinning off the organization from the City itself with the Friends of the 
Junior Museum and Zoo taking over the operating and fundraising. 
 
Council Member Kou questioned if the City-owned the land and the building.  
 
Mr. Shikada answered yes. 
 
Vice Mayor DuBois mentioned that the Motion did not contain any timing and 
he thought the 6 month timing after it opened was acceptable. 
 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “…six months after it 
reopens…” 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED: Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded 
by Council Member Kou to direct Staff to return with a report or item on the 
Junior Museum and Zoo, six months after it reopens, and what it would look 
like to eliminate the General Fund subsidy through a fully cost recoverable 
program. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED: 5-2 Kniss, Tanaka no 
 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 34 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Mayor Fine moved the discussion to price changes and the increase of 
Employee Permits for all garages and lots in the California Avenue District to 
be consistent Citywide. 
 
MOTION: Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member XX to 
direct Staff to return with a discussion of price changes and increases for 
employee permits in all garages and lots in the California Avenue district to 
be consistent City-wide. 
 
Mr. Shikada relayed that there was going to be a discussion regarding 
permit pricing for the new California Avenue Garage and this will be 
discussed as well during that time.  
 
Council Member Kou questioned when the item would come back to the 
Council. 
 
MOTION WITHDRAWN BY THE MAKER 
 
Mr. Shikada confirmed it would come back fall of 2020.  
 
Ms. Stump disclosed that Staff would consider the One Percent for Art Policy 
Motion as a long-term Parking Lot item and will return to Council after the 
summer break with more information.  
MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to 
adopt the Ordinance Amending Section 2.04.360 of the Palo Alto Municipal 
Code to Allow Council Members a Salary Waiver Option.  
Council Member Cormack concurred that the Motion allowed Council 
Members to participate in the same way many City employees were 
participating.  
Council Member Kniss asked if it was necessary to take this action.  
Ms. Stump confirmed that it was a legal requirement to provide a waiver.  
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Mayor Fine continued onto the general recommended Action regarding the 
budget. 
MOTION: Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to: 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 35 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
A. 
Direct Staff in regard to the City Manager’s Fiscal Year 2021 Proposed 
Operating and Capital Budgets and Fiscal Years 2021 Municipal Fee 
Schedule including the following amendments detailed below, as 
amended via City Council motions, for Staff to return on June 22, 2020 
with the final Fiscal Year 2021 budgets for City Council adoption: 
i. 
Formal adoption of the City Manager’s Fiscal Year 2021 Proposed 
Operating and Capital Budgets as amended by the actions 
outlined in Attachment A, Exhibit 1 and Exhibit 2 of CMR 11376;  
ii. 
Formal adoption of the Fiscal Year 2021 Municipal Fee Schedule; 
iii. 
Formal adoption of the Table of Organization (Pages 339 – 356 
in the Fiscal Year 2021 Proposed Operating Budget) as amended 
by the above actions; and 
iv. 
Formal approval of the Fiscal Year 2021 – Fiscal Year 2025 
Capital Improvement Plan as revised through Attachment A, 
Exhibit 2 of CMR 11376. 
 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested an answer regarding a Re-appropriation Report 
regarding the breakdown of the $88 million. 
 
Ms. Nose articulated that Staff could provide a list that broke down the $88 
million and suggested it be an informational attachment for the June 22, 
2020 meeting. 
 
Vice Mayor DuBois declared that it could come back in August, 2020 if Staff 
needed more time. 
Mr. Shikada was not sure if Staff was planning to do another estimate before 
the Re-appropriation Report in the fall.  
Vice Mayor DuBois emphasized that the budget was complicated and 
contained a lot of different reports.  The Report helped the Council 
understand where funding was able to be reallocated if need be. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired if there were structural changes that 
needed to be made within the organization to move dollars from the 
management side to people doing the work.  
Mayor Fine did not believe exploring structural changes promoted any new 
data. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 36 of 36 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 5/26/2020 
Council Member Kou did not want future Budget processes to be framed so 
strictly. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1 Tanaka no 
ADJOURNMENT: The meeting was adjourned at 10:10 P.M. honoring the 
men and women that gave their lives while serving in the U.S. military.   
 
