CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
ACTION MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 3 
Special Meeting 
 
September 21, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in Virtual 
Teleconference at 5:04 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Consent Calendar 
Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou, third by Council 
Member Filseth to move Agenda Item Numbers 1 and 3 to a date uncertain.  
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to approve 
Agenda Item Numbers 2, 4-6. 
1. 
Approval of Construction Cameras for use at the California Avenue 
Parking Garage and Highway 101 Pedestrian/Bicycle Overpass 
Construction Projects; and Approval of a Parking Guidance System in 
Accordance With the Surveillance and Privacy Protection Ordinance. 
2. 
Approve Contract Amendments to Extend the Following Banking and 
Related Services Contracts: 1) U.S. Bank and its Wholly-owned 
Subsidiary Elavon for General Banking and Merchant Services; 2) Wells 
Fargo for Lockbox Services; 3) Union Bank for Investment Safekeeping 
(Custodial) Services; and 4) JP Morgan Chase Bank for Purchase Card 
(P-card) Services. 
3. 
Consideration of an Appeal of a Director's Interpretation Made Pursuant 
to Palo Alto Municipal Code Section 18.01.025 and Related to Seismic 
Rehabilitation. The Project is Exempt From the California Environmental 
Quality Act (CEQA) in Accordance With CEQA Guidelines 15061(b)(3). 
4. 
Approval of a Contract Between Project Safety Net, Inc. for Youth Mental 
Health Support in the Amount of $100,000 per Year; Approval of a One-
time Transfer of $21,604 in Donations for a Not-to-Exceed Amount of 
$521,604 for the Term of September 21, 2020 Through June 30, 2025; 
and Approval of a Budget Amendment in the Public Services Donation 
Fund by a Two-thirds Vote. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 3 
City Council Meeting 
Action Minutes:  09/21/2020 
5. 
Resolution 9914 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto to Extend the Bicycle and Electric Scooter Share Pilot Program for 
18 Months.” 
6. 
Resolution 9915 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Approving and Authorizing the City Manager or Designee to Execute 
the Continuing Reimbursement Agreement for Letters of Credit With US 
Bank National Association at an Estimated Cost of $35,000 per Year in 
Connection With the City’s Market Purchase Program Agreement With 
Northern California Power Association (NCPA);” and Authorizing the 
Execution and Delivery of all Documents Relating to the Letters of 
Credit. 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 2, 4-6:  7-0 
Rail Communications Update 
7. 
Connecting Palo Alto Rail Grade Separation: Receive an Update From 
the Expanded Community Advisory Panel (XCAP). 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Council took a break at 7:19 P.M. and returned at 7:35 P.M. 
Action Items  
8. 
Recommendation of the Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) 
to: 1) Discuss the Draft Economic Analysis Analyzing Potential Increases 
to Inclusionary Housing Requirements;  2) Maintain the Inclusionary 
Housing Requirements at 15 Percent for Ownership Housing and the 
Housing Impact Fee for Rental Housing; and 3) Authorize an Analysis of 
Specific Adjustments Across the Spectrum of Zoning and Financial 
Factors That Would Support a 20 Percent Inclusionary Housing 
Requirement. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to: 
A. 
Maintain the inclusionary housing requirements at 15 percent for 
ownership housing units and retain the housing impact fee for rental 
housing projects;  
B. 
Direct Staff and the Planning and Transportation Commission to explore 
possible zoning amendments or other factors that could support a future 
20 percent inclusionary requirement for ownership and rental housing 
while recognizing that such analysis will be constrained without funding 
for additional consultant resources; and 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 3 
City Council Meeting 
Action Minutes:  09/21/2020 
C. 
Direct Staff to return with adjustments to parking and retail standards 
in a manner consistent with this analysis. 
AMENDMENT:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to maintain inclusionary housing requirements at 15 percent  for 
ownership housing units; and direct Staff to return with a proposal to replace 
the housing impact fee for rental housing with an inclusionary requirement.  
AMENDMENT FAILED:  3-4 Cormack, Fine, Kniss, Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Kou no  
Council took a break at 9:56 P.M. and returned at 10:11 P.M. 
9. 
Discussion and Direction to Staff on Housing Affordability Requirements 
for Projects Proposed Under the Planned Home Zoning (Planned 
Community Zoning). This Action is Exempt From the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) in Accordance With CEQA Guidelines 
15061(b)(3). 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to:  
A. 
Endorse an approach that offers a menu of options to home builders to 
meet the 20 percent inclusionary requirement for “planned home 
zoning” projects; and  
B. 
Affirm direction regarding the calculation for determining the number of 
housing units required to offset net new jobs created by a planned home 
zoning project. 
MOTION PASSED:   4-3 DuBois, Filseth, Kou no 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned in honor of the late Supreme Court 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsberg at 11:27 P.M. 
 
