CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 25 
Special Meeting 
 
November 30, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in Virtual 
Teleconference at 6:01 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Study Session 
1. 
Study Session on Community and Economic Recovery. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager noted that the item was a continuation of the 
October 19, 2020 discussion.  Staff requested recommendations from the 
Council regarding how to structure the framework for the City’s strategy, 
priority activities, and community engagement.  The recovery strategy was 
to be used as an iterative process.  Staff will bring back the item on 
December 7, 2020 for further discussion and feedback on potential focus 
areas and engagement concepts.  In summary, before the Coronavirus 
(COVID-19) Pandemic, the City had a daytime population of roughly 140,000 
with a 70,000 population in the evening.  With the significant reduction in 
daytime population, the City has lost roughly $34.6 million in revenue for 
Fiscal Year (FY) 2020-2021.  The City has had to make roughly $33.8 million 
in  budget cuts to City departments. 
Kiely Nose, Director of Administrative Services/Chief Financial Officer 
introduced Jerry Nickelsburg, Thomas Adams, and Nick Bloom who were 
presenting key trends to consider when the City can resume after the 
COVID-19 pandemic has concluded. 
Jerry Nickelsburg, UCLA Anderson Forecast disclosed that he was presenting 
the United States and State of California economic outlook.  Key critical 
questions were when will the pandemic ends, will there be a second stimulus 
package, and what will the near-term Economic Policy be. The forecast 
assumed that a small stimulus package will pass late in the first quarter of 
2021 and that the near-term Economic Policy will not change in the next 12-
months.  The forecast predicted that slow growth will occur starting at the 
end of FY 2021 and continuing through FY 2022.  The State of California has 
continued to open the State at a slower pace than other states which has 
caused a high unemployment rate.  After referencing a past study that was 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
done for the 1918 flu, it was discovered that if there are better health 
outcomes, there will be better economic outcomes.  The high unemployment 
rate in the State of California has not done any serious damage to the 
underlying organic economy relative to the rest of the United States.  The 
high-income sectors that were not predicted to recover until past FY 2023 
were leisure, hospitality and retail.  In summary, many broken employment 
relations require time to recover, housing continues to play a strong role in 
the economy, and the Fiscal Policy is going to be limited.  The State of 
California is predicted to outperform the rest of the states because of its 
strong technology base businesses and high-income jobs but is predicted to 
lag in low-income jobs such as leisure, hospitality, and retail. 
Thomas Adams, Muni Services/Avenue Insights presented an update on the 
City’s Sales Tax.  He emphasized that each City is unique and is uniquely 
impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.  The City has a Sales Tax rate of 9 
percent and the City receives 1 percent of that rate.  There are five main 
Sales 
Tax 
Categories 
which 
were; 
general 
retail, 
food 
products, 
transportation, construction, and business to business.  Two separate 
categories 
also 
included 
were 
miscellaneous 
which 
housed 
health, 
government, and others as well as the County pool which housed online 
sales, Wayfair Revenue, and 3rd party vehicle sales.  Out of the top 25 
businesses that suppled the most revenue to the City, 12 were in general 
retail, six in transportation, five in business to business, one in food 
production, one in health and government, and zero in construction.  
Pandemic recession impacts to date included large cash decreases in Quarter 
1 for FY 2020, large declines in business activities in Quarter 2 for FY 2020, 
large increases in internet purchases and new Wayfair related revenues, and 
the data was not yet available for Quarter 3.  The pandemic recession 
showed different characteristics from other recessions including what was 
unexpected and hit overnight, it affected retail and restaurants more than 
other businesses, and internet purchasing became a much larger aspect for 
the economy.  Sales Tax revenue for Quarter 2 of FY 2020 was $29,922,852 
with 20 percent of the overall total coming from internet purchases.  The 
City was below statewide Sales Tax revenue levels in the categories of retail, 
food production, transportation, and miscellaneous/other.  The City was up 
in the business to business category.  The County Pool category continued to 
be more important during the pandemic.  The County Pool was based on all 
eligible Sales Tax activity within the county.  Quarterly allocations were 
based on the City’s brick and mortar Sales Tax receipts as a percentage of 
all brick and mortar receipts for all jurisdictions within the county.  The City 
typically received 6 to 8 percent of the County Pool, but for FY 2020 Quarter 
2, the City received 5.1 percent.  FY 2020 Quarter 3 was relatively flat and 
the City was down approximately 23 percent compared to FY 2019.  It was 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
predicted that it would take Palo Alto 4-years to recover from the pandemic 
recession.  
Nick Bloom, Stanford University presented on will working from home 
continue after the pandemic has ended.  Before the COVID-19 pandemic, 
only 2 percent of Americans worked from home full time.  During the 
pandemic, the work from home percentage skyrocketed to 40 percent of 
Americans working from home.  There have been differing views on will 
companies continue to allow employees to work from home after the 
pandemic.  Nationally only 10.5 percent of less than high-school degree 
employees were working from home with 53.4 percent of Graduate Degree 
employees working from home.  For the City, employees working from home 
were very unequal across income and education levels.  Offices within the 
City plan to move to a hybrid option of working three days at the office and 
two days at home.  There was becoming a huge shift from skyscraper office 
type buildings to low, easily accessible office buildings due to social 
distancing requirements.  This shift benefits the City because the City had 
many low rises.  It was predicted that traveling for business meetings would 
decrease after the pandemic which greatly affects the City’s Transient 
Occupancy Tax (TOT).  Based on the facts, it was recommended that the 
City increase accessibility to downtown and localized shopping, continue to 
roll out the Fiber Network, and control noise wherever possible. 
Council Member Filseth asked how much of the 33 percent in the other 
category for Sales Tax comes from Stanford Shopping Center and Town and 
Country Village. 
Mr. Adams answered for Quarter 3 for FY 2019, Stanford Shopping Center 
produced roughly $1.9 million in Sales Tax. 
Ms. Nose noted that the regional generation of Sales Tax is different than 
the category of Sales Tax.  Regional generation looked at all categories and 
sector-specific looked at individual businesses Citywide. 
Council Member Kniss emphasized that long-term people cannot be isolated 
within their homes and continue to be successful employees. 
Mr. Bloom agreed with that statement.  Short-term productivity was very 
successful with the work from home model but long-term productivity and 
creativity declined.  Employee retention may increase if employees can work 
from home two days a week.  
Mr. Nickelsburg added that new employees will be strongly affected by a 
five-day work from home schedule if it is implemented because they will not 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
know the office culture and managers will not know how to incentivize work 
production.  
Mr. Bloom confirmed that the inequality of working from home will grow 
because many low-income jobs cannot be done from home.  
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to understand the interrelationship between 
Airbnbs and if 30-day stays for Airbnbs would increase hotel demand.  
Mr. Nickelsburg noted that not having students on campus at Stanford 
University strongly affects the hotel business. 
Mr. Adams disclosed that hotels tend to see more business travel while 
Airbnbs see more vacation occupants. 
Vice Mayor DuBois questioned how surrounding cities that do not have a lot 
of brick and mortar retail are affected by the County Pool allocations.  
Mr. Adams concurred that it is an inequitable way of distributing Sales Tax 
revenue.  
Fran Mancia, UC Regent opined that the tax system is outdated and does not 
keep up with the way that businesses are currently run.  Discussion on the 
topic were taking place and he expected to see more legislative action taking 
place to address the areas of equability.  
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired if the density in office space will return to normal 
if a vaccine is produced. 
Mr. Bloom confirmed that in terms of layout, he predicted that offices will 
move to a more open space concept instead of little cubicles.  
Mr. Nickelsburg reported that a survey was done of developers of office 
space and they expect to continue to develop the same amount of office 
space that was developed in prior years. 
Council Member Cormack disclosed that healthcare is the number one 
employer in the City and she wanted to understand how that industry will 
change or be affected in terms of work from home.  
Mr. Bloom commented that doctors are conducting more medical conference 
calls to patients than before. 
Mr. Mancia confirmed that there is a direct Sales Tax impact due to COVID-
19 patients being prioritized over elected surgeries and procedures. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Mr. Nickelsburg predicted productivity for medical professionals will increase 
dramatically as more technology comes online.  
Mr. Bloom recommended that the City think about planning when it comes 
to repurposing facilities that currently house businesses that may never 
recover like gyms or movie theaters. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if hotel occupancy would increase if the City 
lowered its Hotel Tax. 
Mr. Nickelsburg indicated that consumers do not look at the Hotel Tax when 
they book a hotel room.  
Mr. Adams agreed with Mr. Nickelsburg. 
Council Member Tanaka pointed out that the City’s online purchases have 
increased but the City’s County Pool allocation has decreased.  He wanted to 
know how to increase the City’s share of the County Pool.  
Mr. Mancia mentioned that it would require state legislation changes.  Some 
cities have a Special Transaction Use Tax which allows all online taxes to go 
directly to the City.  He suggested that the League of Cities address the 
topic. 
Mr. Adams understood that it would take a Constitutional Amendment to 
change the County Pool allocations to a destination base. 
Council Member Kou found comfort that  businesses are considering offering 
different work schedules for employees.  She pointed out that many of the 
top 25 businesses in the City that generate the most Sales Tax are high-end 
stores.  She wanted to know if the pandemic has affected those high-end 
stores. 
Mr. Adams confirmed that there has been shifts in consumer behavior in 
terms of what they spend their money on.  
Council Member Kou inquired if car sales has remained consistent with pre-
Covid sales. 
Mr. Adams reported that initially there was a decrease, but he expected to 
see an increase in Quarter 3 reports. 
Council Member Kou asked what percent does the City receive from auto 
leases. 
Mr. Adams commented that it is based upon the first 3-years of the lease. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Mayor Fine wanted to know the impacts of consumers buying goods from 
other cities and having them delivered to their homes. 
Mr. Bloom emphasized that the County Pool incentivizes more brick and 
mortar stores be built within a City.  Because the City has a strong retail 
presence he foresaw the City not being strongly impacted by online sales. 
Mayor Fine inquired if there are any other foreseeable impacts regarding the 
public sector and universities not having students on campus.   
Mr. Mancia reiterated there is an impact on Sales Tax and hotel usage. 
Matt Dolan, Chamber of Commerce found that the Staff Report and 
suggested framework was comprehensive and impressive.  He shared that 
the Chamber of Commerce shares the priorities the Council has set forth.  
He urged the City to utilize the Chamber’s resources and connections when it 
comes to implementation. 
Em Horst emphasized that there is a trend of a much greater fraction of the 
workforce becoming vulnerable to shifts of employment and shifts in 
housing.  He urged the Council to consider housing issues as they relate to 
economic recovery.  He also urged the Council to provide more support for 
lower-income persons.  
Mayor Fine wanted to focus more on the mental health of the community 
and how to support residents.  He suggested the City provide a type of 
ombudsman support for local retailers, draft guidelines for businesses who 
are reopening, and fold in mental health and building safety under priority 
initiatives.  
Council Member Cormack commented that she is looking for the County Pool 
allocations to be accurate across the state.  She highlighted that 
communication is very important and the City continues to thrive in that 
area.  She plugged that vaccine distribution and logistics needed to be 
addressed.  She advised that a program consisting of neighborhood leaders 
be implemented to facilitate communication between neighborhoods and the 
City.   She wanted to see further dialog between residents and the City on 
what businesses are needed within the community.  She emphasized that 
Fiber-to-the-Home has become critical for residents and employees who are 
now working from home.  
Vice Mayor DuBois echoed Council Member Cormack’s thoughts.  He agreed 
that a Committee made up of all the Council Members made the most sense 
for engagement.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Council Member Kniss disclosed that many residents have reduced their 
yearly healthcare checkups due to fear of contracting the virus.  Other 
avenues that could be explored to help facilitate more community 
engagement was bringing the program Cool Blocks and Emergency 
Preparedness into the discussion.  Communication among neighbors was a 
key component and needed further support from the City.  
Council Member Kou concurred that utilizing all communication programs 
that currently exist within the community was key and she suggested 
engaging Palo Alto Neighborhoods and neighborhood associations.  She 
agreed that Fiber-to-the-Home is important.  She suggested including a 
development strategy in the plan.  She concurred with the suggestion of 
having the full Council be involved in the development of the Community 
and Economic Recovery Plan. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed that the City needed to help facilitate 
COVID-19 testing and distribution of a vaccine when it is available.  He 
advised that the Fiber-to-the-Home project should continue at a quicker 
pace.  He encouraged more discussions with experts and that the Chamber 
of Commerce should be involved more.   He wanted to see continued focus 
and support for the worst-hit businesses like childcare and restaurants.  He 
suggested the Council think about the future of education and how the 
education model may change.  He commented that communication could be 
stronger if the technology was better utilized and he wanted to see more 
surveys done regarding interactions between residents and the City. 
Council Member Kou requested that Staff brainstorm and execute other 
activities that the City can host for residents. 
Council Member Cormack encouraged Staff to discuss with Palo Alto Unified 
School District the decreased enrollment.  
Council Member Kniss was disappointed that the expert panel did not include 
healthcare professionals.  She encouraged Staff to continue discussions with 
experts in other areas that the pandemic is affecting.  
Mr. Shikada commented that if the Council has experts in mind, to share 
that with Staff. 
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed with Council Members Kniss’s comment about a 
healthcare expert as well as Council Member Kou’s suggestion of outdoor 
City hosted events.  
Council took a break at 8:15 P.M. and returned at 8:25 P.M. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Special Orders of the Day 
2. 
Selection of Applicants to Interview for the Historic Resources       
Board and the Planning and Transportation Commission. 
MOTION: Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth 
to direct Staff to schedule interviews for the Planning and Transportation 
Commission (PTC) and Historic Resources Board (HRB) for a date in January 
2021; and extend the application period for the HRB. 
Council Member Kou believed that it would be good for the newly elected 
Council Members to participate in the interviews.  
Council Member Filseth confirmed that the newly elected Council Members 
have expressed that they would like to participate in the interview process. 
Vice Mayor DuBois shared that he felt having the interviews in the last 
meeting of December was intellectually inconsistent.  He supported the 
Motion.  
Council Member Kniss commented that the current Ordinance was adopted 
in 2016, many of the current Council Members had approved it, and for 
those reasons, she did not support the Motion of changing the interview 
process for Boards and Commissions to January.  
SUBSTITUTE MOTION: Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to interview all current applicants for the HRB and PTC and extend the 
recruitment for the Historic Resources Board. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION PASSED: 4-3 DuBois, Filseth, Kou no 
Beth Minor, City Clerk commented that the interviews will be conducted, and 
December 14, 2020 is when the new Board and Commission Members will be 
appointed. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None 
Oral Communications 
 
Hal Mickelson, a member of the Board of Directors of the Palo Alto History 
Museum, corrected a misunderstanding that the museum has not spent all 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
the money it has raised.  Of the $10 million that the museum has raised, 
only $4 million has been spent.  
Rich Green, the President of the Palo Alto History Museum, restated that the 
museum has already secured 2/3’s of the $10.5 million total that is needed 
to rehabilitate the Roth Building.  The Palo Alto History Museum is eager to 
continue discussions with Staff and Council. 
Peter Drekmeier, Policy Director of the Tuolumne River Trust, was proud of 
the Council 2 years ago when the Council announced support of the Bay 
Delta Water Quality Control Plan.  He voiced frustration that Council Member 
Cormack, who represented the City, expressed support of the Voluntary  
Agreement at the workshop that was held by the San Francisco Public 
Utilities Commission.  Her support of the Voluntary Agreement went against 
the prior vote of support for the Delta Water Quality Control Plan.  He 
requested that the Council revisit the discussion.  
Minutes Approval 
3. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the November 09, 2020 City Council 
Meeting. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to 
approve the Action Minutes for the November 09, 2020 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Michele Dauber urged the Council to remove the Downtown Streets contract 
from the Consent Calendar.  She wanted to see the item tabled until 
Downtown Streets can provide a redacted copy of the report of the 
organization’s handlings of sexual harassment allegations. 
Aram James agreed with Ms. Dauber’s comments. 
Pat Burt encouraged the Council to remove Item Number 4 from the Consent 
Calendar.  He suggested to the extend the contract for 6-months so that 
services are not stopped, and Downtown Streets can provide a copy of the 
redacted report regarding sexual harassment allegations.  
Winter Dellenbach concurred with all previous speaker’s comments regarding 
the removal of Item Number 4 from the Consent Calendar. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member DuBois, 
third by Council Member Kniss to pull Agenda Item 9A “…Letter Expressing 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Concerns and Objection to the Valley Transportation Authority (VTA)…” to 
hear it at the end of tonight’s meeting, to become Agenda Item Number 
11A.  the Regular Agenda as new Agenda Item Number 11A. 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 5. 
MOTION: Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois, third by 
Council Member Kniss to pull Agenda Item Number 4, “Approval of a Three-
year Contract With Downtown Streets, Inc….” to a date uncertain. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager believed that there was a short timeline before the 
current Downtown Street services would be discontinued and he shared that 
he would discuss with Staff how quickly the item could return to Council.  
Council Member Kniss wished to comment on the Consent Calendar. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney expressed that Council cannot make substantial 
comments to items that are pulled from the Consent Calendar. 
Vice Mayor DuBois registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 5. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 5-9. 
4. 
Approval of a Three-year Contract With Downtown Streets, Inc. for a 
Total Amount Not-to-Exceed $323,244 for Maintenance Services for 
the City's Five Downtown Parking Garages, Downtown Sidewalks and 
Alleys; and Provide Outreach Case Management Services to the 
Downtown Core With the Intent of Linking Homeless Individuals to 
Community and Housing Services. 
5. 
Approval of a Funding Agreement With the Palo Alto Transportation 
Management Association (TMA) to Provide $350,000 in Fiscal Year (FY) 
2021; and Authorize the City Manager to Execute Amendments to 
Determine Funding Subject to Council Appropriation in FY 2022 and  
FY 2023 to Reduce Single-occupancy Vehicle Trips to Palo Alto. 
6. 
Adoption of the Amended Community Development Block Grant 
(CDBG) Citizen Participation Plan. 
7. 
Adoption of a Pension Funding Policy. 
8. 
Resolution 9927 Entitled “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Vacating a Public Utility Easement at 1201 Parkinson Avenue.” 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
9. 
Approval of the Tri-cities Consortium Records Management System 
Software Agreement With Sun Ridge Systems Inc. for $621,248, and a 
Term Ending Five Years From the Date of Project Implementation to 
Establish a New Records Management System for the Police 
Departments of Palo Alto, Mountain View, and Los Altos. 
9A.  City Council Endorsement of the Letter Expressing Concerns and 
Objection to the Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) Measure B 
Funding Proposal. 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 5: 5-2 DuBois, Kou no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 6-9:  7-0 
Council Member Kou shared that one of the functions of the Palo Alto 
Transportation Management Association (TMA) is that they are supposed to 
fundraise.  The City has been the only entity that has been providing funding 
for the TMA.  She wanted to know what the Regional TMA Group has to offer 
and if the City should leverage that group.  She shared that the City should 
not be deciding on appropriate funds when revenue is uncertain and advised 
that funding be discussed at budget planning.  
Vice Mayor DuBois preferred to discuss the TMA’s request during the budget 
update process. 
City Manager Comments 
 
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager updated the Council regarding the Coronavirus 
Pandemic (COVID-19).  The State of California as a  whole was now in the 
Purple Tier due to an up rise in COVID-19 cases.  The State of California was 
issuing a new relief package to support businesses which included tax 
deferrals.  A modified Stay at Home Oder had been issued through 
December 21, 2020, which limited gathering sizes and restricted activities 
outside the home between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M..   In 
response to the new Stay at Home Order, the City has reduced hours in 
neighborhood parks, open space reserves close at dusk, and the Palo Alto 
Art Center and Children’s Theatre will remain closed.  Santa Clara County 
issued new restrictions as of November 30, 2020, that restricted indoor 
capacity for indoor retail and other facilities open to the public, outdoor 
gatherings were limited to 100 people or less, temporary prohibitions were 
extended for contact sports, and several others.  The City has provided an 
online portal that holds information for non-profits that are requesting 
assistance from the public as well as a list of support services for individuals 
who need assistance.  Upcoming testing dates for the COVID-19 were 
December 4, 2020, and December 18, 2020.  Free flu shots were being 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
provided through Santa Clara County as well as several healthcare 
providers. 
Council Member Cormack advised Staff to explore where the test results are 
recorded when a healthcare provider refers a patient to another City for 
testing.  
Council Member Kniss explained that the test is reflected in the patient’s 
home county numbers.   
Council Member Kou urged power turn offs to be held off until Stanford 
University students were on break.  
Mr. Shikada noted that Staff continues to work with the Utilities Department 
and will provide additional information to the Council and residents when it is 
available.  
Action Items 
10. 
Consideration of Follow-up Recommendations by the City Council Ad 
Hoc Committee on Boards, Commissions and Committees (BCCs), 
Including Adopting a Handbook and BCC Applications. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated all the input that was provided by the 
community and Council Members.  Small changes had been made in the 
wording of specific areas that were brought up.  The Ad Hoc Committee met 
with all the Chairs of the Boards and Commissions and received feedback on 
concerns they had and what training may look like. The Ad Hoc Committee 
requested feedback on term limits. 
Vice Mayor DuBois reconfirmed that the Chairs of the Architectural Review 
Board and the Historic Resources Board had suggested three, 3-year terms, 
or two, 4-year terms for their members.  There was a suggestion to mirror 
the Council’s timeframe that Staff follows for Agenda Packets distribution.  If 
the Council motioned to move the appointments to spring, the City Attorney 
would have to bring back code updates to accommodate those changes.   
Fred Balin appreciated the change to allow seven members on the Parks and 
Recreation Commission, the new language under the Code of Conduct 
regarding quasi-judicial hearings, the new language under proceedings, the 
new language under removal, and the new language regarding public 
participation.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Aram James did not agree with the suggestion to have extended terms for 
members who have expertise in an area because it will cause unfairness and 
status issues among Board Members and Commissioners.  
Jeff Greenfield announced that he was speaking on his own behalf.  He 
shared that having the Work Plans due in June was a good idea but he had 
concerns regarding how new items are added to a Work Plan.  He shared 
that moving the term start dates to March or April would be helpful.  He 
strongly disagreed with the suggestion of having two terms, or 6-year limit, 
for the Boards and Commissions with 3-year terms.  He suggested updating 
the City’s website to reflect the new Handbook.  
Valerie Stinger stated that she was speaking on behalf of herself.  She found 
the Handbook to be a huge step forward and appreciated all the work that 
the Council and the Staff have done.  She advised to include the Human 
Services Resource Allocation Process (HSRAP) Fund allocations and 
Emerging Need Fund allocations in the description of work for the Human 
Relations Commission.  If the Human Relations Commission continues with 
three priorities as well as standing commitments, the workload is too much 
for five Commissioners to handle and she requested that Council keep the 
membership as is. 
Council Member Kou asked the Ad Hoc Committee to repeat their proposal 
regarding term limits. 
Vice Mayor DuBois restated that the suggestion was to have a limit of three, 
3-year terms, or two, 4-year terms.  
Mayor Fine inquired if the only way to remove a member from a Board or 
Commission is to have three Council Members draft a memo and have it 
agendized for Council to consider.  
Council Member Cormack shared that the language was added to address 
comments suggested by the public to have the removal process be 
conducted in a public session.  
Molly Stump, City Attorney confirmed that removal of a member would be a 
rare occurrence.  If it did happen, the Council would do that work in a public 
session.  
Council Member Kniss felt uncomfortable having the language regarding 
removal in the Handbook.  She inquired if it was essential to have that 
policy. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Ms. Stump disclosed that it is not essential, but it is in other Cities’ Boards 
and Commissions Handbooks.  
Council Member Cormack concurred that other cities do have that policy in 
their Handbooks and it felt appropriate for completeness. 
Council Member Kniss shared that the Council should give the member a 
chance to resign before enacting a full public meeting. 
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed that would be the process.  
Council Member Tanaka shared Council Member Kniss’s removal concerns 
and suggested that there be a supermajority vote to remove a member from 
a Board or Commission.  He mentioned that term limits should only apply if 
there are enough volunteers to fill the slots.  He supported an increase of 
membership for the Human Relations Commission.  He believed that the 
Chairs should be able to set their agendas.  He supported the idea of having 
items go on the Consent Calendar for the Council if there was a unanimous 
vote among the members of the Board or Commission.  
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to:  
A. 
Adopt the City of Palo Alto Boards, Commissions, and Committees 
Handbook;  
B. 
Use the Architectural Review Board Application as a template for all 
Boards and Commission Applications; 
C. 
Direct Staff to take the steps necessary to implement these changes; 
D. 
Update Human Relations Commission (HRC) description to include 
HSRAP and Emerging Needs Study; and 
E. 
Modify term limits to three terms for positions on the Historic 
Resources Board and Architectural Review Board, and two terms for all 
other BCCs.  
Council Member Cormack felt that term limits should be based on the needs 
of the Board rather than the limits of the year.  She believed that 
changeover is good for Boards and Commissions.  
Council Member Kniss wanted to see the Human Relations Commission be 
increased to seven members.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Council Member Cormack recalled that the Human Relations Commission 
often did not have enough applicants to fill positions.  
Vice Mayor DuBois confirmed that is correct. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to keep the membership of the Human Relations 
Commission to seven members.(New Part F) 
Vice Mayor DuBois accepted the Amendment but wanted to see it voted on 
as a separate item.  
Council Member Cormack also accepted the Amendment but voiced that she 
would vote no because she wanted to see if the Human Relations 
Commission could continue its work with five members.  
Council Member Kou asked when the new term limits would be applied.  
Ms. Stump explained that Council must decide on when the term changes 
would apply.  
Council Member Kou suggested that term limits be applied to the new 
appointees. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to apply term limits to currently serving BCC 
members who would be eligible to re-apply for an additional term.         
(New Part G) 
Vice Mayor DuBois accepted the Amendment. 
Council Member Cormack summarized that a member who is in their second 
term can apply and be appointed one more time and then that would 
conclude their service.  She accepted the Amendment, but she wanted to 
know how many members this change would affect.  
Council Member Kou wanted to see the Parks Master Plan be changed to the 
Parks, Trails, Natural Open Space and Recreation Master Plan.  
Council Member Kniss asked if state law says that four Council Members are 
needed to approve the removal of a Board or Commission Member. 
Ms. Stump explained that Council determines the vote. 
Meghan Horrigan Taylor confirmed that surrounding City’s Handbooks 
require a majority vote, not a supermajority.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
AMENDMENT: Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Mayor Fine that 
the removal of a BCC member would require five votes by the City Council. 
AMENDMENT FAILED: 3-4 Fine, Kniss, Tanaka yes 
Council Member Filseth agreed with Council Member Cormack that the 
Council should wait a year to increase membership for the Human Relations 
Commission. 
Mayor Fine agreed with Council Member Filseth’s comment but felt regret 
shrinking the Human Relations Commission in the first place.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired if there is an option to allow existing 
members to reapply if there are not enough applications for the vacant 
positions.  
Ms. Stump reiterated that there are no state or federal laws that require 
Council to follow concerning managing appointments of Board and 
Commission Members.  
Vice Mayor DuBois emphasized that the desire around not allowing existing 
members to reapply was to allow more community members to volunteer.  
Besides the Architectural Review Board and the Historic Resources Board, 
there has been no shortage of applications.  
Council Member Cormack noted that Council and Staff can make the call to 
reappoint a member who has termed out when that scenario comes to the 
forefront.  
Council Member Tanaka responded that taking it on a case by case basis felt 
cumbersome.  He wanted to restore some power to the Chairs of the Boards 
and Commission and allow them to set their agendas.   
Vice Mayor DuBois confirmed that the Ad Hoc Committee had explored the 
topic extensively.  The Ad Hoc Committee felt that Staff provided 
professional insight that helped Boards and Commissions be more effective 
in their work.  
Council Member Cormack added that Staff is very responsive to requests 
made by Boards and Commissioners. 
Council Member Tanaka declared that many small items are lost because the 
Boards and Commission cannot agendize them.  
Council Member Cormack reiterated that amendments to the Work Plan can 
be brought to the Council.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Council Member Tanaka restated that he wanted to see unanimously voted 
recommendations come to Council on the Consent Calendar. 
Vice Mayor DuBois responded that unanimously voted recommendations are 
agendized based on conversations made between the Mayor, Vice Mayor, 
and the City Manager. 
Council Member Kou requested an amendment that the timing of providing 
Staff reports to Boards and Commissions mirror Council’s 11 days 
timeframe. 
Vice Mayor DuBois did not support the amendment because 11 days was too 
long and not flexible enough. 
Council Member Kou suggested that the Staff reports be provided at least 
seven days in advance. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated the desire to standardize but did not 
support the amendment. 
AMENDMENT: Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka to require staff reports be provided to the BCCs seven days in 
advance of each meeting. (New Part H) 
Council Member Kniss inquired what the current standard is. 
Mayor Fine reported that there was no current standard for Boards and 
Commissions. 
Mr. Shikada confirmed that Staff Reports are provided within 72-hours of a 
Board 
or Commission 
meeting 
and 
that 
followed 
the 
Brown 
Act 
requirements.  He emphasized that there was a reluctance to set a standard 
that may result in unintended consequences, but Staff could evaluate the 
request further. 
AMENDMENT PASSED: 4-3 Cormack, Filseth, Fine no 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council 
Member Cormack to:  
A. 
Adopt the City of Palo Alto Boards, Commissions, and Committees 
Handbook; and  
B. 
Use the Architectural Review Board Application as a template for all 
Boards and Commission Applications; 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
C. 
Direct Staff to take the steps necessary to implement these changes; 
D. 
Update Human Relations Commission (HRC) description to include 
HSRAP and Emerging Needs Study;  
E. 
Modify term limits to three terms for positions on the Historic 
Resources Board and Architectural Review Board, and two terms for all 
other BCCs;  
F. 
Keep the membership of the Human Relations Commission to seven 
members; 
G. 
Apply term limits to currently serving BCC members who would be 
eligible to re-apply for an additional term;  
H. 
Require staff reports be provided to the BCCs seven days in advance of 
each meeting. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING  
MOTION AS AMENDED FOR PARTS A-E, G, AND H PASSED: 7-0 
MOTION AS AMENDED FOR PART F FAILED 3-4: Kniss, Kou, Tanaka yes 
Council took a break at 10:16 P.M. and returned at 10:22 P.M. 
11. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Appeal of a Director's Interpretation Made Pursuant 
to Palo Alto Municipal Code Section 18.01.025 and Related to Seismic 
Rehabilitation. 
The 
Project 
is 
Exempt 
From 
the 
California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) in Accordance With CEQA Guidelines 
15061(b)(3). 
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning and Development Services reported that 
the item was an appeal of a zoning interpretation.  The current Zoning Code 
allowed downtown property owners to rehabilitate their seismically 
vulnerable buildings and receive a Floor Area Bonus of at least 2,500-square 
feet.  In the past, the City has allowed demolition to be a remedy to address 
seismic vulnerability, but that language was changed several years ago to 
not allow demolition anymore.  Under the new change, Staff’s interpretation 
was that the Zoning Code change allowed only a narrow band of properties 
to qualify for the Floor Area Bonus through demolition.  The interpretation 
does not apply to historic buildings, the properties would still require 
structural analysis, peer review of the reports, and a determination from the 
Building Official that states that it would be infeasible to rehabilitate the 
building.  The zoning interpretation was posted to the website on June 29, 
2020, the appeal was filed on July 13, 2020, the appeal was placed on the 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Council’s Consent Calendar on September 21, 2020 and was pulled by three 
Council Members.  Any decision made by the Council was final and effective 
immediately.  The interpretation purpose is to balance the strict 
interpretation of the code with broader public policy interests.  The 
appellant’s believed that a Text Amendment, which would require public 
hearings in front of the Planning and Transportation Commission and 
Council, was the appropriate path forward to implement the new policy.  
Staff was seeking recommendations on if the formal zoning interpretation 
authority appropriately applied to this interpretation.  
Public Hearing opened at 10:33 P.M. 
Karen Holman noted that the only requirement is to post the interpretation 
on the City’s website, but she believed there should be an informational item 
presented to the Council to ensure transparency.  The appellants believed 
that rehabilitation and demolition are not the same things and that they 
should not be used interchangeably.  The code states the buildings must be 
seismically 
rehabilitated 
to 
contemporary 
structure 
standards 
but, 
demolished buildings by definition are not retained or rehabilitated buildings.  
The Staff Report referenced that the Comprehensive Plan related to reducing 
exposure due to seismic risk, but the Comprehensive Plan does not replace 
existing code and does not authorize Staff to supersede the code.  Staff has 
the authority to interpret when there is an ambiguity, but there is no 
ambiguity in the code.  If the Council agreed with Staff’s interpretation, that 
will set a precedent, and that the interpretation will apply to other situations 
without public or Council awareness.  The Staff report asserted that the 
current Transfer Development Rights (TDR) program is not enough to 
incentivize rehabilitation and such a statement was not substantiated by 
objective evidence.  Another consideration point was once a project received 
TDRs, can the generating site then be demolished.  Only a handful of 
seismically vulnerable buildings remain in the downtown area and Council 
needs to consider what the scope is when it comes to a policy change.  The 
Staff report indicated that the historic rehabilitation requirements and 
interpretation of seismic TDRs are not in conflict. The appellant disclosed 
that language needs to be added to the code to make clear that seismic 
materials cannot jeopardize the historic preservation, programs, and 
requirements.  If the word rehabilitation is interpreted as demolition, then 
there is a direct conflict with CEQA requirements regarding historic 
rehabilitation. Several items that the Council should consider if they wish to 
amend the TDR program was can the seismic building support additional 
floor area; and if the project can retain all or most of the vulnerable walls, 
then can the project receive a percentage of the TDRs.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Pat Burt explained that the change to seismic rehabilitation was coming 
forward because in 2017 Council had directed Staff to explore ways to make 
seismically vulnerable buildings in downtown seismically compliant.  Staff 
never returned with the result of that work.  
Ken Hayes confirmed that he was working with the Mills family and he 
supported the Director’s interpretation of allowing demolition as a remedy 
for seismically vulnerable buildings.  Within the first 28-years of applying the 
Seismic Ordinance, 46 percent of the seismically vulnerable buildings that 
were being rehabilitated were demolished and received the allowed 
incentives.   The Mills family’s building is not a historic structure.  Many 
structural studies have been submitted to the City and all determine that the 
building in question should be demolished.  
Leslie Mills explained that her family owns an unreinforced masonry building 
and the building is structurally unfit to withstand a seismic event.  In 2014, 
the Council overlooked the purpose of the Seismic Ordinance and focused on 
the word rehabilitation to prevent new buildings from getting the Floor Area 
Bonus.  This sentiment was passed down to the Planning Department who 
began to require that buildings retain 50 percent of the structure to qualify 
for the incentives.  She concluded that the City should be encouraging the 
total removal of seismically vulnerable buildings, not discouraging it.  The 
City will still receive In-Lieu Parking Fees from the additional bonus square 
footage and the project complies with all requirements. 
Ms. Holman restated that there is no opposition to making buildings safer, 
but the reason for the appeal is to make sure that Staff is not making policy 
decisions.  
Pat Burt confirmed that the Mills’ project is not what is being appealed.  It is 
the Director’s decision that is being appealed and for that reason, the 
Director should supply a response. 
Mr. Lait confirmed that he was available for questions from the Council.  
Mr. Burt emphasized that the intention is to strengthen the movement 
toward seismic upgrades and that has not happened. 
Public Hearing closed at 10:55 P.M. 
Council Member Filseth requested a status update on the direction that was 
set forth by Council in 2017 that Staff return with alternatives regarding the 
Seismic Ordinance.  He asked how the newly proposed Mills building 
compared to the existing building.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Mr. Lait explained that the newly proposed Mills building included the new 
bonus floor area and that it has received approval through the Architectural 
Review Board.  Council had received an update on the work that was 
completed on October 16, 2017.  There were additional directions to engage 
the Policy and Services Committee, hire a consultant to do technical studies, 
and elaborate on mandatory and voluntary incentives that could be applied.  
Staff had intended to come forward with a budget request to complete the 
work, but due to budget constraints the proposal was never brought 
forward. 
Vice Mayor DuBois remarked that the Seismic Ordinance specifies that a 
project will receive an additional 2,500-square feet, or an additional 25 
percent, whichever is greater. 
Mr. Lait answered yes. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired if the bonus floor area cannot be used, can they 
be sold as TDRs. 
Mr. Lait confirmed that the extra square footage is eligible for the City’s TDR 
Program and can be sold. 
Vice Mayor DuBois challenged why Staff never changed the language in the 
Ordinance.  
Mr. Lait expressed that Council would have to direct Staff to make those 
changes.  
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to know what Findings are required to be found 
to allow for demolition. 
Mr. Lait emphasized that Staff spends a lot of time with projects and makes 
sure they can be rehabilitated without being demolished.  He noted that 10 
existing masonry buildings need to be rehabilitated throughout the City.  
Vice Mayor DuBois challenged if it made sense to limit the Seismic Ordinance 
to Category 1 buildings.  
Mr. Lait mentioned that if Council directed Staff to make a Text Amendment 
then it was appropriate to limit the Ordinance to Category 1 buildings only.  
Council Member Cormack wanted further clarification on what Staff was 
seeking from Council.  
Mr. Lait explained that Council is making a policy decision and not about the 
Mills project.  The questions Council needed to answer where was this the 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
appropriate use of the Zoning Administrators' authority to make an 
interpretation that would allow for demolition in discreet instances, does 
demolition qualify as rehabilitation, and is it eligible for floor area bonus.  If 
yes, then the next question was does the Council agree with the Director’s 
interpretation.  If Council did not agree with the interpretation, the 
interpretation would be invalidated, and any policy change would be done 
via Text Amendment. 
Council Member Cormack inquired if the Director has even made other 
interpretations. 
Mr. Lait disclosed that this was the first formal interpretation since the code 
was amended in 2016.  Staff makes interpretations every day because the 
code does not cover every scenario.  
Council Member Kou summarized that the Director’s interpretation changed 
a policy that the Council made and then made a new policy. 
Mr. Lait clarified that the interpretation was a formal interpretation of the 
Zoning Code as well as the considerations of the City’s other public policy 
interests to mitigate unsafe buildings.  
Council Member Filseth believed that the interpretation was a policy change, 
but he supported the Planning Department’s instincts when it came to the 
determination of the Mills’ building.  
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth 
to allow the current interpretation for up to one year; and direct Staff to 
return to Council with a text amendment to clarify that the Floor Area Ratio 
(FAR) bonus is for rehabilitation and, in the case of a Category 1 building, it 
would include demolition assuming all other requirements to qualify are met. 
Vice Mayor DuBois remembered the Council had discussions regarding the 
Seismic Ordinance and that there were very large incentives included in the 
Ordinance.  He remarked that it was not good practice to interpret 
rehabilitation to mean demolition.  
Mr. Lait shared that Staff is comfortable with the Motion.  
Council Member Filseth voiced that the Motion is a cleaner way of addressing 
the issues. 
Mayor Fine requested if the fact is true that when the Seismic Ordinance was 
established, roughly half the buildings that fell under the Ordinance were 
demolished.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Mr. Lait confirmed that is correct. 
Mayor Fine was concerned that only Category 1 buildings are allowed to be 
demolished and wished to see Category 2 and 3 buildings be included. 
Council Member Cormack requested clarification between Category 1, 2, 
Unreinforced Masonry (URM), and Category 3 buildings.  
Mr. Lait explained that Category 1 is unreinforced masonry buildings within 
the City, Category 2 is all pre-1935 buildings other than URM with an 
occupancy of 100 or more people, and Category 3 are all buildings with 300 
occupants or more that were constructed between 1935 and 1976. 
Council Member Cormack asked which categories the 10 remaining buildings 
fell under. 
Mr. Lait clarified that the buildings are URM buildings. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to know how many Category 2 buildings 
have not been rehabilitated.  
George Hoyt, Chief Building Official restated that for downtown buildings, 
three Category 2 buildings and nine Category 3 buildings were remaining.  
Council Member Kou questioned if the three Category 2 buildings and nine 
Category 3 buildings are unreinforced. 
Mr. Lait reiterated that URM buildings are more vulnerable than other 
category buildings.  There are ways to strengthen those buildings but adding 
floor area to them is very hard. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka to deny the appeal upholding the director’s interpretation related to 
seismic retrofitting. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED:  3-4 Fine, Kniss, Tanaka yes  
Council Member Cormack requested if Staff felt that Category 2 needed to 
be added to the Motion.  
Mr. Lait suggested that Staff continue to study the item and bring back an 
analysis for the Planning and Transportation Commission and Council to 
consider. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Kniss no 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois left the meeting at 11:35 P.M. 
11A.  (Former Agenda Item Number 9A) City Council Endorsement of the 
Letter Expressing Concerns and Resolution 9928 Entitled “Resolution of 
the Council of the City of Palo Alto [in] Objection to the Valley 
Transportation 
Authority 
(VTA) 
Measure 
B 
Funding 
Proposal 
(Previously Agenda Item Number 9A).” 
Ed Shikada, City Manager recapped that the item was brought to Staff’s 
attention by actions taken from Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) Staff 
where they proposed a 10-year cost analysis scenario that relocated funds 
within the Measure B Funding Program to the Bay Regional Rapid 
Transit(BART) program.  The letter raised objections and concerns about the 
actions that VTA was proposing. 
Mayor Fine added that VTA was proposing to use up to 80 percent of the 
Measure B funding for the BART project which would result in the City not 
receiving funding for road repairs and grade separation.  
Council Member Kniss reported that VTA did the same thing with Measure A 
funds.  It takes a supermajority vote to redirect funding in a different 
direction than what the measure was originally intended for.  She felt that 
VTA Board Members were the driver of the change, not VTA Staff. She 
supported Supervisor Joe Simitian’s letter and urged Council to encourage 
Supervisor Simitian to run for a position on the VTA Board.  Council Member 
Cormack has been selected to sit on the VTA Board for the next 2-years.  
She strongly urged the Council to support the letter of opposition. 
Council Member Filseth agreed with Council Member Kniss’s comments and 
disclosed that there are governance issues within VTA that need to be 
addressed. 
Council Member Cormack supported the letter. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to   
endorse the letter submitted by Mayor Fine expressing concern and 
opposition to the Valley Transportation Authority’s (VTA’s) proposed cash 
flow limiting the availability of Measure B transportation funds, and to adopt 
the Resolution opposing the Valley Transportation Authority’s 2016 Measure 
B 10-year outlook base scenario. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-0 DuBois absent 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 25 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/30/2020 
Council Member Kniss encouraged Council to use their resources to voice 
strong opposition to what Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) was trying 
to do with Measure B funds.  
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:49 P.M. 
