CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 22 
Special Meeting 
August 10, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in Virtual 
Teleconference at 5:03 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to move 
Agenda Item Number 8, “PUBLIC HEARING / QUASI-JUDICIAL. 2353 Webster 
Street [18PLN00339] …” to be heard before Agenda Item Number 7. 
Mayor Fine believed there would be public interest in Agenda Item Number 8. 
Council Member Cormack was able to agree to reordering the Agenda because 
the Council had not received any public comment regarding Agenda Item 
Number 7. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0  
Oral Communications 
Richard Gianuario thanked the Fire Department for responding to the call at 
his family's multifamily building located on Matadero and opposed the 
Council's reduction in Fire Department staffing. 
Rebecca Eisenberg recommended the Council institute a Business Tax to fund 
the General Fund rather than housing. 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 5. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 2. 
Mayor Fine disclosed communication with the members of the school adjacent 
to the carwash in Agenda Item Number 5 regarding noise issues. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 1-5. 
1. 
Resolution 9910 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Establishing Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 Secured and Unsecured Property 
Tax Levy for the City of Palo Alto’s General Obligation Bond 
Indebtedness (Measure N).”  
2. 
Approval and Authorization for the City Manager or Designee to Execute 
a Blanket Purchase Order With the Okonite Company for Underground 
Cable for the Utility's Electric Underground System in an Annual Amount 
of $350,000 for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $1,750,000 Over the 
Next Five Years.  
3. 
Approval and Authorization for the City Manager to Execute Necessary 
Agreements Subordinating the City's Interests in the Palo Alto Gardens 
Multiple Family Residential Property at 648 San Antonio Road to 
Facilitate Refinancing of the Affordable Housing Development.  
4. 
Policy and Services Committee Recommends the City Council Accept the 
Status Updates of the Parking Funds Audit. 
5. 
QUASI-JUDICIAL. 2585 E Bayshore Road: Approval of the Planning and 
Development Services Director's Determination to Authorize a Waiver 
From the Retail Preservation Ordinance. Environmental Assessment: 
Exempt in Accordance With the California Environmental Quality Act 
(CEQA) Guidelines Section 15061(b)(3). 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 1, 3, 4:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 2:  6-1 Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 5:  6-1 Kou no 
Council Member Tanaka noted Staff did not want to release a bid for the 
electric cable because the cable was the only one that met specifications and 
requirements.  Requiring a specific manufacturing process seemed extreme. 
Council Member Kou indicated a quasi-judicial hearing should not be placed 
on the Consent Calendar. 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager reported COVID-19 testing would occur on August 
14 and 28, 2020 at the Art Center by appointment only.  Face coverings were 
required when residents were in public.  Residents were encouraged to support 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
local businesses.  A temporary art installation, The Bucolic Labyrinth, was 
under construction in King Plaza.  The artist, Paz de la Calzada used synthetic 
turf removed from the Cubberley soccer field for the artwork.   
Council Member Kniss noted there were reports of COVID-19 testing not being 
completed.  The Board of Supervisors indicated the County of Santa Clara 
(County) was no longer tracking test results.  She requested the City Manager 
verify that the City's order for face coverings was consistent with the County's 
Order.   
Mr. Shikada confirmed that exercise was a non-mandatory activity, but face 
coverings were encouraged during exercise.   
Mayor Fine requested City messaging emphasize the rule of thumb for 
residents to wear face coverings when outdoors. 
Council Member Cormack advised that residents respond to questions prior to 
obtaining an appointment for testing.   
Council Member Tanaka indicated participants in his office hours stated City 
workers were not wearing masks. 
Mr. Shikada related that City employees could not wear masks during some 
activities, but he would reinforce the message to City employees. 
Action Items 
5A.  Selection of Applicants to Interview for one Position on the Human 
Relations Commission and two Positions on the Public Art Commission 
(Continued From August 3, 2020).  
Council Member Cormack requested the requirements for service on the Public 
Art Commission (PAC) and the Human Relations Commission (HRC). 
Jessica Brettle, Assistant City Clerk reported members of the HRC must be 
residents of the City.  Members of the PAC needed to be professional visual 
artists, professional visual arts educators, art scholars or art collectors whose 
skills were known and respected in the community and, when feasible, who 
had demonstrated an interest in or participated in the City's Arts Program. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to schedule interviews with the following candidates: 
A. 
Human Relations Commission: 
i. 
Nilofer Chollampat 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
ii. 
Sunita de Tourreil 
iii. 
Sofia Fojas 
iv. 
Curt Kinsky 
v. 
David Villaseca Morales 
vi. 
Paula Rugg 
vii. 
Lestina Trainor 
B. 
Public Art Commission: 
i. 
Marilyn Gottlieb-Robert 
ii. 
Hsinya Shen (Incumbent) 
iii. 
Harriet Stern  
iv. 
Nia Taylor (Incumbent)  
Council Member Cormack did not believe interviewing all candidates was a 
wise use of time.  Candidates for the PAC needed to comply with requirements 
for service on the PAC and live or work in Northern California.   
Council Member Kniss noted prior PAC Commissioners lived in nearby cities 
and served the PAC well. 
Council Member Kou preferred to interview all PAC candidates to learn about 
their qualifications.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Vice 
Mayor DuBois to interview all applicants for the Human Relations Commission 
and Public Art Commission.  
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested qualifications should be emphasized during 
recruitments.  The Council needed to avoid political appointments.   
Council Member Cormack noted the Council received candidate information 
the prior week.  There were clear distinctions between candidates with 
professional and scholarly interests in art and those with a general interest.  
Hopefully, the new recruitment process emphasized the qualifications for 
Board and Commission members. 
Council Member Kniss felt having some criteria for inviting candidates to 
interviews was important.  Council Members were interested in selecting the 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
candidates who seemed to be the most interested in service and had the best 
background. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed with comments regarding the wise use of 
time.  He did not have one candidate's application; therefore, he was not able 
to determine whether she was qualified.   
Mayor Fine noted the candidate's application was available in the digital 
Council Packet.  Interviewing all candidates required a large quantity of 
Council Members' and Staff's time.  The applications typically provided 
candidates' qualifications.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED:  2-5 Cormack, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Tanaka 
no  
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Kou no  
5B.  Update and Discussion on Plan Bay Area 2050 Draft Blueprint and the 
Regional Housing Needs Allocation Process; and Direction to Staff to 
Prepare Comment Letters on These Regional Efforts (Continued From 
August 3, 2020). 
Rachel Tanner, Assistant Director of Planning and Development Services 
defined the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) and reported the 
California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) 
allocated 441,176 new housing units to the Bay Area on June 9, 2020.  The 
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) declined to appeal the 
allocation.  The allocation was comprised of 25 percent very low income units, 
14 percent low income units, 16 percent moderate income units, and 42 
percent above moderate income units.  The current housing cycle was going 
to end in 2023.  As of the end of 2019, the City issued 554 building permits 
for housing units towards their allocation of 1,988 units.  ABAG's Housing 
Methodology Committee (HMC) was likely going to release a draft 
methodology for allocation of housing units to jurisdictions in the fall, 2020.  
The HMC considered three methodologies:  factor-based total allocation and 
income shift, bottom-up, and incorporation of Plan Bay Area 2050.  Depending 
upon the baseline and methodology, Palo Alto's RHNA was able to range from 
4,480 housing units to 15,040 housing units.   
Greg Schmid called attention to Super District Number 9 in Plan Bay Area and 
questioned the citizens' ability to discuss requirements. 
Rebecca Eisenberg noted the City's record for housing production and the 
complaints about the job/housing imbalance.  A Business Tax made existing 
tax subsidies and discounts meaningful.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
Terry Holzemer urged the Council to send the HMC a comprehensive letter 
complaining about the lack of public engagement and process and to comment 
on the public letter regarding the methodology process. 
Kelsey Banes suggested the Council accept responsibility for meeting housing 
goals and that they understand that Palo Alto neighborhoods had to change. 
Iban Sadowski believed the allocation was the result of jurisdictions not 
changing to meet the needs of the community. 
Council Member Kniss inquired regarding changes to the consequences for 
jurisdictions that failed to meet housing allocations. 
Ms. Tanner indicated State legislation, such as Senate Bill (SB) 35, often 
utilized RHNA as a reward or penalty for jurisdictions.  The Housing Element 
for the next cycle had to identify housing opportunity sites and zoning 
changes, which provided the number of housing units allocated in Palo Alto. 
Vice Mayor DuBois reminded Council Members that an alternate draft letter 
had been emailed to them.  The Council needed to understand which 
methodologies provided feasible housing numbers.  It felt as though Palo Alto 
was going to have the largest allocation on a percentage basis in the Bay Area.  
The allocation was going to be virtually unattainable.  Failure to fulfill the 
allocation meant a State override of local land use policies.  RHNA was 
essentially a large unfunded housing mandate.  The Council revised 
Ordinances and implemented incentive programs to encourage housing, but 
housing production had not occurred.  He questioned whether the City should 
willingly participate in a process that led to failure.  The City needed to develop 
a legal strategy to combat the no-win scenario and needed to attempt to 
obtain an achievable housing allocation.   
Mayor Fine noted Vice Mayor DuBois wrote the alternate draft letter and 
believed it skirted the Brown Act. 
Council Member Cormack requested the end date of the current RHNA cycle. 
Ms. Tanner advised that the current cycle extended from 2015 to 2023, and 
the City's next Housing Element had to be certified by January, 2023.   
Council Member Cormack inquired regarding State review of the City's housing 
production for the current cycle. 
Ms. Tanner understood the City would have four years into the next cycle to 
meet their housing targets for the current cycle.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
Council Member Cormack inquired about the process for a jurisdiction to 
appeal the allocation for another jurisdiction. 
Rebecca Atkinson, Senior Planner reported an appeal process had been 
authorized but not defined.   
Council Member Cormack requested the basis for the percentages in the 
income shift methodology. 
Ms. Tanner replied household income.   
Ms. Atkinson added that it was household income for Santa Clara County. 
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of jobs/housing fit and 
jobs/housing balance in the three-factor bottom-up methodology. 
Ms. Atkinson explained that jobs/housing fit was related to equity and housing 
available for low-income and high-income workers.  The jobs/housing balance 
was the number of jobs relative to the number of housing units.   
Council Member Cormack reiterated that the jobs/housing fit meant the 
amount of low-income housing should correlate to the number of low-income 
residents. 
Council Member Kou clarified that the alternate letter was signed by Vice 
Mayor DuBois, Council Member Filseth and herself, and it was submitted to 
the Council for distribution with the Packet.  She asked if HCD or ABAG had 
expressed a willingness to revisit RHNA in light of COVID-19 and the State 
Department of Finance's Demographic Report.   
Ms. Tanner reported the bodies were not authorized to stop the processes.  
The City was able to seek their legislative delegation's assistance in stopping 
the processes. 
Mr. Shikada explained that the City needed to find a legislator willing to 
sponsor a bill to halt the processes. 
Council Member Kou proposed Staff determine other cities' interest in such 
legislation, and perhaps the cities were able to work together to propose such 
legislation.  She requested the rationale for Staff not recommending an income 
shift of 175 percent. 
Ms. Tanner explained that Staff's recommendation was based on the HMC's 
discussion of 125-150 percent.  The City was able to support a higher 
percentage. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
Council Member Filseth noted RHNA and Plan Bay Area were interrelated and 
referred to five key challenges for Plan Bay Area 2050 and the allocation 
dilemma.  Plan Bay Area 2050 included costs for the first time, and $450 billion 
was needed to solve the affordable housing problem.  The projections were 
suspect.  The City needed to ask ABAG for the cost of a scenario that 
distributed job growth more equitably, especially in lower housing-cost areas.   
Mayor Fine requested an explanation of the City's progress toward its RHNA 
goal of 587 units in the above-moderate category, which was shown as 126 
percent and 420 units. 
Ms. Tanner explained that 126 percent referred to the region.  In that 
category, the City's progress was about 71 percent. 
Mayor Fine asked if Staff tracked permits, construction, or both. 
Ms. Tanner advised that Staff tracked construction through building 
inspections. 
Mayor Fine requested Staff provide the construction information. 
Ms. Tanner agreed to do so and indicated construction was incentivized 
through the expiration of entitlements.   
Mayor Fine inquired whether expired entitlements were deducted from RHNA 
reports. 
Ms. Tanner needed to determine that, but they probably were going to have 
to be deducted from the reports. 
Mayor Fine remarked that many housing sites identified in previous Housing 
Elements had not been developed and asked about changes in strategy for 
identifying housing sites in the next Housing Element. 
Ms. Tanner indicated Staff would struggle with that in preparing the next 
Housing Element.  One thought regarding the lack of development was that 
the City failed to provide incentives for the property owner to sell his property 
to a developer or to develop the property himself.  Additionally, the cost of 
developing the property was possibly too great. 
Mayor Fine inquired regarding an achievable housing goal if the City was not 
able to meet their Comprehensive Plan goal of 300 units per year. 
Council Member Kou commented on job growth and commercial development 
in relation to housing.  Legislation limited jurisdictions' control of land use and 
zoning.  She inquired about the cost of the City's membership or participation 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
in ABAG and the League of California Cities.  ABAG's projections needed to be 
questioned.   
Mr. Shikada agreed to provide the cost of the City's membership dues toward 
ABAG and membership options.   
Council Member Filseth remarked that Plan Bay Area 2050 was creating an 
almost impossible task for the Bay Area.  SB 35 appeared to enable big mixed-
use projects that increased housing demand.  Plan Bay Area 2050 combined 
with State legislation was only going to intensify the current situation.  The 
alternate letter supported the concept of relocating job growth.   
Vice Mayor DuBois proposed the Council review scenario planning with Staff 
and direct Staff to return with strategies to influence the process.  He reviewed 
the alternate letter.   
Mayor Fine commented that the community had shown an unwillingness to 
solve housing production and to use local control to encourage market-rate 
and affordable housing.  He did not support the alternate letter's implication 
that housing goals were impossible.  In past discussions of Housing Work 
Plans, housing advocates had stated the incentives were not sufficient to meet 
goals.  Yet, the Council had complied with the community's desires.  Palo Alto 
had not tried very hard to solve the housing problem.  SB 35 produced 
thousands of new housing units.  Neither housing nor commercial 
developments were being proposed in the City.  The land and funding of the 
California Avenue Parking Garage had the possibility to be used for affordable 
housing.  He referred to housing produced through Redwood City's Gatekeeper 
Process.  He preferred the housing crescent jobs approach for the factor-based 
methodology; 
agreed 
with 
comments 
regarding 
the 
income 
shift 
methodology; and believed a focus on jobs proximity was logical in the 
bottom-up methodology. 
Council Member Cormack related that planning was difficult and complex, and 
funding was critical for housing production.  She concurred with scenario 
planning.  She expressed concern regarding the use of strong language during 
the meeting.  The letter was polite.   
Council Member Kniss believed the Council had to find an alternate source of 
funding for affordable housing.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth to 
direct Staff to: 
A. 
Incorporate the new concepts from the Council alternate letter into their 
comment letter to ABAG’s/MTC’s Housing Methodology Committee, with 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
some stronger wording and asking that there is an evaluation of a new 
scenario that focuses on job spread through the Bay Area and recognizes 
cities efforts to limit job growth; 
B. 
Return to Council with some scenario planning based on anticipated 
allocations; and 
C. 
Return to Council with strategic options for us to influence RHNA 
allocations and respond effectively throughout the process. 
Vice Mayor DuBois clarified that Subpart A proposed the incorporation of 
concepts from the alternate letter into the draft letter.  The Council needed to 
review scenarios under the most likely allocations.   
Council Member Filseth proposed Subpart C refer to milestones and updates. 
Vice Mayor DuBois stated Subpart C could direct Staff to present some options 
for the Council to respond effectively throughout the process.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council 
Member Cormack to:  
A. 
Direct Staff to continuing work on two regional planning efforts, which 
are Plan Bay Area 2050 and the Regional Housing Needs Allocation 
(RHNA) process, and return to Council with scenarios in anticipation of 
preparing the new Housing Element; and 
B. 
Direct Staff to submit a comment letter to ABAG/MTC’s Housing 
Methodology Committee reflecting City Council initial comments 
regarding the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) methodology 
options that are under consideration. 
Council Member Kniss indicated a new approach to housing was needed. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated Staff's efforts to anticipate the Council's 
requests. 
Mr. Shikada reported scenario planning required additional resources and 
obtaining resources could conflict with RHNA timeframes. 
Mayor Fine inquired whether the Substitute Motion included briefing the 
Council regarding costs and needed resources for scenario planning. 
Council Member Kniss responded yes. 
Ms. Tanner requested clarification of the scenarios. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
Council Member Cormack wanted to understand potential sites for housing 
and potential zoning changes.   
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed that scenario planning should provide the Council 
with a rough sketch of potential housing sites.  The difference between the 
Motion and the Substitute Motion was a consideration of job growth and other 
ways to spread jobs around the Bay Area.  A Business Tax and increased 
Impact Fees was enough to fund housing.   
Council Member Kou agreed that the decrease in commercial development 
severely reduced funding for affordable housing.  The letter did not address 
ABAG's projections or dispersion.  The community did not support additional 
commercial development. 
Council Member Filseth believed a majority of residents concurred with the 
concept that job growth and housing growth needed to be factors in resolving 
the housing problem. 
Mayor Fine agreed that most residents would support new housing over jobs.  
The ability to disperse jobs was possibly limited, but dispersion had the 
potential to negatively affect Palo Alto's economy.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION PASSED:  4-3 DuBois, Filseth, Kou no 
Council took a break at 7:46 P.M. and returned at 8:00 P.M. 
6.  
Accept an Update on the Summer Streets Program; Resolution 9911 
Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Amending 
Resolution Number 9909 to Extend the Temporary Street Closures of 
California Avenue, University Avenue and Adjacent Downtown Blocks to 
December 31, 2020; Extend the University Avenue Closure to High 
Street; Extend the Expiration Date of Resolution Number 9909 Including 
the Temporary Parklet Program to September 7, 2021; and Clarify 
Allowed Activities.” 
Rachel Tanner, Assistant Director of Planning and Development Services 
reported on June 23, 2020, the Council authorized temporary street closures, 
a temporary Parklet Pilot Program, and expansion of outdoor dining and retail.  
She summarized Staff's activities regarding California Avenue and Downtown 
merchants, the community, stakeholders, permits, inspections, guidelines, 
surveys, signage and advertising, and counts.  Staff received 203 responses 
to the online survey, 92 percent from Palo Alto residents.  Forty percent dined 
at California Avenue, 20 percent at University, and 40 percent at both.  Thirty-
six percent of respondents walked, and 15 percent biked to Downtown and 
California Avenue.  Ninety-five percent of respondents had a great parking 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
experience, would return to Summer Streets, and felt safe.  Comments 
included requests to make the program permanent or an annual event.  On 
California Avenue, 11 restaurants received permits for outdoor dining; 
evenings were busier than lunch; weekends were the busiest time; businesses 
estimated they earned 25-60 percent of pre-pandemic revenue; and parking 
on neighboring streets was not impacted.  On University Avenue, 15 
restaurants received permits for outdoor dining; evenings and weekends were 
the busiest times; businesses estimated they earned 16 to 80 percent of pre-
pandemic revenue; and parking along a section of Webster was the only 
neighboring street impacted.  The Parklet Program was generally successful 
with six parklets in use.  Parklets were allowed on roadway surfaces to reduce 
costs.  Parklets often provided less seating than indoor space and less seating 
than a closed street.  Two private parking lots and some public parking lots 
were being used for dining and retail.  Staff was developing guidelines and 
rules for outdoor recreation and personal services.  Staff recommended 
extending street closures to December 31, 2020, adding the block of 
University Avenue between High and Emerson Streets to the program, 
granting Staff the ability to modify the program as needed; extending the 
Parklet Program to Labor Day 2021 but ending at-grade parklets on December 
31, 2020; and authorizing additional activities on closed streets.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager advised that slightly more than half of businesses 
supported continuing the University Avenue closure.  He thought that in the 
future, the Council may want to discuss the recovery of costs associated with 
the private use of public rights-of-way.  He requested suggestions for 
rebranding the Summer Streets Program. 
Cedric de La Beaujardiere encouraged the Council to extend the Summer 
Streets beyond December 2020 and offered suggestions for outdoor dining in 
winter months and additional assistance for local businesses. 
John Shenk indicated non-restaurant retailers were suffering because of street 
closures.  Outdoor dining in winter months was not going to be practical.  The 
focus needed to be narrowing drive aisles and expanding parklets.   
Todd Burke related that the program on California Avenue was successful, but 
the Summer Streets Program also needed to benefit retailers.   
Rob Fischer remarked that the program benefitted 15 of 350 restaurants in 
Palo Alto.  Retailers were suffering.  Parklets seemed to be an equitable 
solution.   
Rebecca Eisenberg appreciated the Summer Streets Program.  The City 
needed to invest in parklets for restaurants and retailers.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
John McDowell supported expanding access to the Summer Streets Program 
to all businesses.   
Ross Mayfield advised that 2,600 people signed a petition in support of the 
program.  He encouraged the Council to extend the timeframe for the Summer 
Streets Program. 
David Epstein proposed continuing the Summer Streets Program, increasing 
foot and bicycle traffic to benefit retailers, and making Hamilton and Lytton 
one-way to increase parking.   
Iban Sadowski suggested permanently closing streets so the people could 
enjoy the City. 
Jordan Nari, Rangoon and Burma Ruby and Wahlburgers stated times were 
extremely difficult, but the Summer Streets Program helped businesses.  
Hopefully, the program was able to expand in area.   
Evan Hughes, First Presbyterian Church urged the Council to extend street 
closures and enhance bicycle parking as a way to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and build community.   
Michael Elwall supported continuation of the Summer Streets Program and 
encouraged the Council to allow lighting and heating in winter months.   
Taverna appreciated the City listening to the community's needs and strongly 
encouraged the Council to modify the program for cold weather. 
Judy Kleinberg, Chamber of Commerce supported the Staff recommendation 
and expressed concern about the viability of businesses on side streets.  The 
Council needed to develop strategies in support of retail businesses.   
Stefan Heck advised that Downtown businesses would not survive on 
patronage from office workers and tourists but from local citizens.  Palo Alto 
needed to be marketed online so that all businesses were able to benefit. 
Megan Kawkab believed a parklet with a cover and heating for each business 
was expected to attract customers and solve the problem. 
Council Member Kniss hoped Staff would continue to develop programs that 
assisted businesses.  Many office workers that dined Downtown and on 
California Avenue were not going to return until 2021.  She proposed Staff 
explore ways to make closed streets more inviting.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
Council Member Cormack noted the number of people walking Downtown and 
on California Avenue was high.  She inquired whether Project Sentinel applied 
to residences only. 
Ms. Tanner advised that Project Sentinel was to mediate commercial disputes 
if both parties agreed. 
Council Member Cormack agreed with comments regarding activating closed 
streets. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if parklets at Town and Country was permitted and 
about the cost of those parklets. 
Ms. Tanner advised that they had been permitted.  The cost for those parklets 
was probably fairly low, depending on whether they were constructed or 
rented. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired whether Staff had considered tying the timeframe 
for parklets to the emergency declaration.   
Ms. Tanner answered yes, but the uncertainty could cause a business to forego 
a parklet. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired regarding removal of parklets and the City's 
responsibility for parklets if utility work was required.   
Ms. Tanner reported permitting required the removal of parklets and repairs 
to sidewalks, curbs, and streets.  Generally, parklets were not to be 
constructed over known access points to utilities.  Hopefully, utility work was 
able to be delayed to the end of the Parklet Program, but Staff was able to 
work out the details of emergency work. 
Holly Boyd, Public Works Assistant Director referred to Municipal Code 
provisions regarding removal of parklets.  A parklet was not able to be 
installed over a utility vault. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested signage for California Avenue indicate the street 
was closed but businesses were open. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the survey distributed to businesses was the 
same as the survey in the Staff Report. 
Mr. Shikada answered no.  The survey distributed to businesses concerned 
keeping the streets closed.  Primarily restaurants were able to capitalize on 
street closures.  Retailers saw mixed results from street closures.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
Council Member Tanaka requested feedback from restaurants on side streets. 
Mr. Shikada indicated feedback from restaurants on side streets was more 
negative than feedback from restaurants on University Avenue.   
Ms. Tanner added that businesses on side streets were not doing as well as 
businesses on University Avenue.  Few restaurants reported revenues at 50 
percent of pre-pandemic levels.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about retailers. 
Mr. Shikada believed retailers were not doing as well as restaurants and did 
not view street closures as positive under any circumstances.  Retailers 
indicated to Staff that evening customers were interested in entertainment 
rather than shopping; therefore, altering their hours was not going to increase 
sales.  Closing Ramona benefited restaurants on Ramona.  Opening University 
between High and Emerson increased traffic and activity in the area.   
Council Member Kou asked where Ramona was closed. 
Mr. Shikada replied Ramona was closed between Hamilton and the 
underground parking entrance for 250 University. 
Council Member Kou asked how Staff determined the capacity for restaurant 
outdoor seating.   
Ms. Tanner advised that the capacity for indoor seating was applied to outdoor 
seating.  Public Works worked with restaurants on the outdoor seating layout 
and ensured adjacent restaurants shared outdoor space. 
Council Member Kou inquired about the petition Mr. Fischer referenced.  
Mr. Shikada related that the petition asked if businesses supported the closure 
on University Avenue. 
Council Member Kou requested the amount of fees waived through the 
Summer Streets Program. 
Ms. Tanner stated the amount was not insignificant and she promised to 
provide the amount at a later time. 
Council Member Kou asked if the City paid for any visual elements. 
Ms. Tanner answered the City placed twinkle lights in the trees along California 
Avenue and continued to sweep streets.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
Council Member Kou inquired about limits on businesses' additions to the 
street. 
Ms. Boyd reported Staff did not monitor enhancements as long as they were 
located within the parameters of parklets and did not affect sidewalk 
accessibility.  Parklets were not to be built over the sidewalk or attached to 
existing structures. 
Mayor Fine stated the survey results demonstrated the program's success.  He 
inquired regarding the effects of the Summer Streets Program on areas 
outside Downtown and California Avenue. 
Ms. Tanner reported Staff did not have data for that.  The changing nature of 
the pandemic and public health orders challenged Staff's understanding of the 
effects on Downtown and California Avenue area. 
Mayor Fine wanted to ensure the positive effects of street closures were 
distributed geographically.  He inquired about the possibility of making 
Hamilton and Lytton one-way streets. 
Mr. Shikada advised that one-way streets were not under consideration and 
were a major project for Staff.   
Mayor Fine asked if Utilities charged a minimum fee to closed businesses. 
Mr. Shikada indicated fixed charges for water and gas were billed to closed 
businesses.  The charges likely were around $100. 
Mayor Fine asked about a pandemic surcharge. 
Mr. Shikada reported businesses proposed a surcharge that businesses would 
retain.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney related that the City could endorse such a 
surcharge, but businesses were going to need to decide whether to implement 
a surcharge.   
Vice Mayor DuBois believed street closures worked well and supported a group 
of businesses.  He wanted to consider additional uses of City-owned outdoor 
space.  Staff needed to continue to monitor traffic and parking.  Permits 
needed to address as many eventualities as possible.  Perhaps the City was 
able to charge a fee for parklets if the emergency declaration ended prior to 
the expiration of parklet permits.  Parking intrusion into neighborhoods was a 
concern.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
Ms. Tanner explained that guidelines for at-grade parklets required basically 
an enclosure.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the City Manager's opinion regarding the 
number of restaurants benefiting from street closures. 
Mr. Shikada explained that street closures were proposed for locations that 
people traditionally visited.   
Council Member Tanaka proposed closing relevant side streets except for a 
one-way travel lane in the center of the street.  The definition of retail in the 
Downtown area was able to be expanded.  He inquired whether Staff 
considered placing picnic tables for the use of takeout customers.   
Mr. Shikada advised the Council that restaurants should be responsible for the 
hygiene of outdoor seating.   
Ms. Tanner added that Staff could not be responsible for cleaning tables after 
each use.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if Staff had considered utilizing pandemic 
funding to increase marketing.   
Ms. Tanner related that Staff would look at additional marketing. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding restaurants outside Downtown and 
California Avenue seeking outdoor seating permits. 
Ms. Tanner reported permits were approved for two restaurants outside 
Downtown and California Avenue.   
Council Member Kou asked when Staff could provide the Council with updates 
regarding the Summer Streets Program. 
Ms. Tanner suggested Staff could provide detailed updates in December, 2020 
and the spring of 2021.   
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to adopt a 
Resolution Amending Resolution Number 9909 to:  
A. 
Extend the temporary street closures of California Avenue, University 
Avenue and other downtown blocks to December 31, 2020;  
B. 
Extend the temporary street closure of University Avenue to include the 
block between Emerson Street and High Street;  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
C. 
Extend the expiration date of Resolution Number 9909, including the 
duration of the temporary Parklet Program to September 7, 2021; and  
D. 
Allow activities in addition to outdoor dining and retail to occur on 
temporarily closed streets.  
Council Member Kniss recommended Staff explore activities occurring in other 
cities.  She inquired whether the City had an ombudsman program. 
Mr. Shikada answered yes.   
Council Member Kniss suggested a public contest to rename the Summer 
Streets Program.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to direct Staff to return with options for a COVID 
percentage surcharge for local businesses (New Part E); and direct Staff to 
return with a retail support plan focused on vacancies, expanded permitted 
uses, and currently existing retail (New Part F). 
Mayor Fine proposed a pandemic surcharge as a way to support retailers that 
were not able to serve customers on the street. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested Subparts E and F may be overly prescriptive and 
Staff needed to return with a Retail Support Plan.   
Mayor Fine explained that concerns about vacancies and permit uses was 
expressed to him. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed Staff explore converting streets with high 
restaurant densities to one-way streets.   
Council Member Kniss advised that Staff was exploring that option almost 
weekly.   
Mayor Fine reiterated the City Manager's comment. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about ways to increase marketing. 
Mr. Shikada reported Staff would develop a robust program and, if necessary, 
they were able to seek additional funding from the Council. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed Staff develop a utility bill forgiveness 
program with reserved pandemic funding.   
Mayor Fine agreed with directing Staff to explore utility relief. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
Ms. Stump reported utility funds could not be used for a relief program.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “direct Staff to consider 
options for utility relief.” (New Part G). 
Council Member Tanaka proposed the City provide placemaking materials and 
consider temporary relief from the minimum wage requirement. 
Council Member Kniss recalled that the minimum wage requirement was a 
State law. 
Council Member Tanaka questioned whether a pandemic surcharge reduced 
the number of servers' tips.   
Council Member Cormack believed Subpart F was very important as people 
shopped online.  She asked about existing utility assistance programs. 
Mr. Shikada clarified Subpart G pertained to closed businesses.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to amend Motion, Part G to state, “direct Staff to 
return to Council with options for utility relief for closed retail businesses.” 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Kniss moved, 
seconded by Mayor Fine to adopt a Resolution Amending Resolution Number 
9909 to:  
A. 
Extend the temporary street closures of California Avenue, University 
Avenue and other downtown blocks to December 31, 2020;  
B. 
Extend the temporary street closure of University Avenue to include the 
block between Emerson Street and High Street;  
C. 
Extend the expiration date of Resolution Number 9909, including the 
duration of the temporary Parklet Program to September 7, 2021;  
D. 
Allow activities in addition to outdoor dining and retail to occur on 
temporarily closed streets;  
E. 
Direct Staff to return with options for a COVID percentage surcharge for 
local businesses;  
F. 
Direct Staff to return with a retail support plan focused on vacancies, 
expanded permitted uses, and currently existing retail; and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
G. 
Direct Staff to return to Council with options for utility relief for closed 
retail businesses. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
Mayor Fine asked about Council Members' wishes to continue the meeting. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested the Mayor consider public comment for Agenda 
Item Number 8. 
Council took a break at 10:24 P.M. and returned at 10:31 P.M.  
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to 
continue Agenda Item Number 8, “PUBLIC HEARING / QUASI-JUDICIAL. 2353 
Webster Street [18PLN00339]: Appeal of Director’s Approval … " to August 
17, 2020. 
MOTION PASSED: 5-2 Cormack, Fine no 
7.  
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of an Ordinance Amending Palo Alto 
Municipal 
Code 
Chapters 
18.52 
and 
18.54 
Adjusting 
Parking 
Requirements to Facilitate EVSE Installation, Compliance With 
Accessibility Laws, Parking Substitutions, and Parking Lot Re-striping 
and Maintenance. Environmental Assessment: This Project is Exempt 
From the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) in Accordance 
With CEQA Guidelines Section 15301, 15302, 15303, and 15061(b)(3). 
Rachel Tanner, Assistant Director of Planning and Development Services 
reported the amendments reduced the dimensions of an electric vehicle (EV) 
parking stall, allowed extra bike parking, established motorcycle parking, 
provided standards for lot re-striping and maintenance, ensured Code 
language complied with Americans with Disability Act (ADA) requirements, 
enabled parking lot retrofits for accessible parking and charging equipment 
and ensured Codes were consistent and clear.  She explained the proposed 
parking stall dimensions, bike parking, motorcycle parking, re-striping and 
maintenance was consistent with State law, and that ADA requirements and 
existing Municipal Code provisions were covered as well.   
Public Hearing opened and closed without public comment at 10:46 P.M. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the proposed amendments applied to parking 
lots for apartment buildings. 
Ms. Tanner answered yes. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether the proposed amendments were not 
going to result in the loss of parking with the installation of EV charging 
equipment in existing parking lots. 
Sam Gutierrez, Current Planner clarified that the amendment allowed the 
installation of rapid charging equipment in existing parking lots without a loss 
of parking. 
Mayor Fine inquired about interest in advertising on EV charging equipment. 
Ms. Tanner advised that the amendments addressed the installation of 
equipment on private lots.  The property owner determined whether to allow 
advertising.  She needed to investigate the ability to advertise on City-
sponsored charging equipment. 
Mayor Fine requested an explanation of long-term and short-term bike 
parking. 
Mr. Gutierrez related that short-term parking was typically bike racks placed 
near the entrances of buildings.  Long-term bicycle parking was typically bike 
lockers located near employee entrances and public transit. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired whether the proposed amendments applied to 
both public and private parking lots. 
Ms. Tanner replied yes. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked regarding Staff's tracking of the conversion of 
parking spaces. 
Ms. Tanner explained that parking was tracked through the City's permitting 
platform.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if approvals would be ministerial. 
Ms. Tanner indicated approvals would be ministerial or Director decisions.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Code contained any provisions for electric 
bikes, scooters or motorcycles. 
Ms. Tanner reported there were no provisions concerning charging stations for 
electric bikes or skateboards.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding efforts to prevent bike thefts. 
Ms. Tanner wanted to inquire with the Police Department. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 22 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/10/2020 
Council Member Kou requested the number of parking stalls in the Downtown 
and California Avenue public garages that would be lost to charging 
equipment. 
Ms. Tanner was not aware of plans to install charging equipment in public 
garages.  Staff wanted property owners to upgrade their parking lots 
holistically so that Staff was able to reconfigure plans to prevent a loss of 
parking.   
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to adopt an Ordinance amending Title 18 (Zoning Code) Chapters 
18.52 (Parking and Loading Requirements) and 18.54 (Parking Facility Design 
Standards) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code (PAMC). 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0  
8.  
PUBLIC 
HEARING 
/ 
QUASI-JUDICIAL. 
2353 
Webster 
Street 
[18PLN00339]: Appeal of Director’s Approval of an Individual Review 
Application to Demolish an Existing One-story 1,593 Square Foot (SF) 
Home and Construct a Two-story Home (Approximately 2,935 SF) With 
a Basement and an Attached Garage. Zoning District: Single-family 
Residential (R-1). 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
None. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:02 P.M. 
