CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 52 
 
Special Meeting 
 
May 13, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met via virtual teleconference on this 
date at 1:03 P.M. 
Participating Remotely:  Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent:  
Mayor Fine announced Agenda Item No. 6 had been removed from the 
Agenda.   
Oral Communications 
Laura Bajuk advised that funding for repair of the Roth Building roof had 
been received, but one-third of the funding would be lost if construction did 
not begin within a year.  A current construction estimate was close to the 
amount of funds secured for the project.   
Nelson Ng, Palo Alto History Museum Board Member indicated 30 letters in 
support of the History Museum had been submitted to the Council.   
Faith Bell supported rehabilitation of the Roth Building and the History 
Museum. 
Eileen Kim requested the Council reconsider closing the streets to allow 
residents to social distance while exercising and suggested University 
Avenue, California Avenue and Stanford Avenue be the same. 
Hamilton Hitchings was dismayed by the Council's decision to cut Police and 
Fire positions and preferred to delay construction of the fire station.  City 
management needed to voluntarily reduce their salaries.   
Lanie Wheeler supported rehabilitation of the Roth Building as funds had 
been designated for the project.   
John Shenk hoped the City would support the Roth Building and the History 
Museum. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 2 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
John King, Palo Alto History Museum Board Member advised that the Roth 
Building was a perfect location for the History Museum and believed the 
Council needed to support rehabilitation of the building. 
Evan Alexis believed programs for teens were very important and funding for 
the programs should not be cut.   
James Wang concurred with Mr. Alexis' comments. 
Arunin Agarwal stated cutting funding for teen programs would be a tragedy.   
Kevin Dee supported continued funding for teen programs because they 
improved teenagers' lives. 
Carol Kiparsky urged the Council to prioritize funding for the History Museum 
and the Roth Building.   
Alan Yang opposed cuts to teen programs.   
Action Items 
1. 
FY 2020/21 Budget Hearing – Continued From May 12, 2020 Budget 
Hearing– Council will Continue its Discussion of the Upcoming Fiscal 
Year Operating and Capital budgets, Utility Rates, and Proposed 
Municipal Fee Schedule. 
A. 
May 12th Budget Hearing Continuation  
a. 
Community and Library Services Operating Budget  
b. 
Approval of the Preliminary Operating Plan and new 
Municipal Fees for the Junior Museum and Zoo. 
Kiely Nose, Chief Financial Officer and Director of Administrative Services 
summarized the Council's actions on May 12, 2020.  Based on the Council's 
balancing strategies, revenues exceeded expenses by approximately $1 
million.  Staff provided At-Places Memoranda regarding City lease 
information, Cubberley Community Center, Library Monthly Report, Bryant 
Street Garage Fund and the Residential Preferential Parking Permit Program 
(RPP). 
Ed Shikada, City Manager announced Council Members were not available for 
another meeting during the week.  Legal and contractual obligations required 
the City to provide notice to employees who could be affected by the 
Council's Budget decisions.  Without a tentative approval of the Budget, 
there was no time for Staff to prepare a Budget balancing analysis prior to 
the May 26, 2020 Council meeting.  Staff proposed replacing the May 18, 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 3 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
2020 Council meeting with a Budget hearing and rescheduling the May 18, 
2020 Council meeting to May 19, 2020.   
Mayor Fine encouraged Council Members to complete the Budget review 
during the meeting so that the contractual obligation to employees could be 
fulfilled, which saved the City money.   
Vice Mayor DuBois recalled the Council's request for the original Fiscal Year 
(FY) 2020-2021 and the current FY 2020-2021 revenue and expense 
summaries.   
Mayor Fine clarified that the Council discussed the request but did not 
approve it. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if Staff could fulfill the request. 
Ms. Nose responded yes, but by bottom line only and for the General Fund 
only. 
PARKING LOT:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka,  third by Mayor Fine to place in the parking lot, to request Staff 
provide budget reconciliation tables that would show changes between the 
Fiscal Year 2020 and current proposed Fiscal Year 2021 Revenue & Expense 
Summaries, by department, for the General Fund only. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if a notice based on the Proposed Budget could be 
provided to labor groups. 
Mr. Shikada related that noticing additional employees would have an 
organizational impact based on the range of options before the Council.   
Council Member Filseth supported the Staff proposal if the Council did not 
complete the review during the meeting. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about the Council action to place the 
Public Safety Building in the short-term Parking Lot.   
Ms. Nose stated her notes reflect three Council Members did not support the 
Motion.  Staff was able to review the meeting video or the Council could 
move the item. 
PARKING LOT:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council 
Member Tanaka, third by Council Member Kniss, to place in the parking lot 
the understanding of funds for the Public Safety Building. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 4 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Cormack did not believe a budget item for the Roth Building 
had been presented to the Council.   
Mr. Shikada clarified that the History Museum was not part of the Proposed 
Budget.  The Council had referred evaluation of options to the Finance 
Committee.   
Eileen Kim emphasized the importance of continued funding for teen 
programs.   
Barbara Spreng urged the Council to fund the Youth Connectedness Initiative 
so that Palo Alto's youth could discover their value and worth in the 
community. 
Yonatan Maor concurred with Ms. Kim's and Ms. Spreng's comments. 
Arianna Tabrizi opposed funding cuts for teen services.   
Cynthia Dharmawan also opposed budget cuts for teen services.   
Josh Mei remarked that teen programs were important for the mental health 
and development of the City's teens. 
Ellen Rudy emphasized the need to fund the Youth Connectedness Initiative 
so that teens could connect with their peers. 
Winter Dellenbach noted the one Library that served West Palo Alto would be 
closed for two years.  The cost of keeping it open, even partially, was 
minimal.  Hours at Mitchell Park Library needed to be reduced, including 
evening hours added to Rinconada Library.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if Staff had considered charging a fee for use of the 
meeting rooms in the Libraries. 
Gayathri Kanth, Interim Library Services Director replied no.  A fee for use of 
community rooms was implemented recently.   
Vice Mayor DuBois noted Community Services' and Libraries' expenses 
comprised 20 percent of City expenses, and Staff proposed reducing funding 
for the two departments by 27 percent.  Funding needed to be restored to 
some of the low-cost and important services.  The Public Works 
Department's expenses comprised 22 percent of expenses, and proposed 
reductions totaled 12 percent.  He wanted to look for cuts in the Public 
Works Budget in order to fund Libraries, the Art Center, mental health 
programs for teens and Children's Theatre.  He wanted the closures to be 
one year only.  Funding for College Terrace Library needed to be restored.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 5 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
For the square footage, the usage was very high.  More Libraries served 
more people under social distancing guidelines.  He was not able to support 
seven new hires for the Junior Museum and Zoo (JMZ).   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to 
direct Staff to return with a plan to fund through additional cost recovery 
and/or through partial funding of: Teen Services ($400,000), Art Center 
($400,000), College Terrace Library ($168,000), Baylands Interpretive 
Center ($20,000), and to ask Staff to look at reducing three Full-Time 
Equivalent new hires from the Junior Museum and Zoo. 
Council Member Kou indicated the cuts were unacceptable, especially to teen 
programs and Libraries.  More funding was dedicated to monuments than to 
the community.   
Council Member Kniss believed reducing three Full-Time Equivalents (FTE) 
from the JMZ would impact an enormous amount of money raised by the 
community.  That sent the message that the Council did not want a new 
JMZ.   
Vice Mayor DuBois clarified that the Proposed Budget contained seven FTE 
for the JMZ. 
Council Member Kniss related that the JMZ was concerned about managing 
with seven new hires.  
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed to withdraw the proposal to reduce FTE for the 
JMZ, in exchange for considering ways the JMZ would not require additional 
funding. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to remove from the Motion, “… and to ask Staff to 
look at reducing three Full Time Equivalent new hires from the Junior 
Museum and Zoo.” 
Council Member Kniss expressed concern about comments regarding social 
distancing at Libraries.  Library Staff had to ensure there was social 
distancing in the libraries. 
Kristen O’Kane, Community Services Director reported the amount for the 
Baylands Interpretive Center should be $20,000 rather than $200,000. 
Ms. Nose suggested the Art Center cost was closer to $1 million. 
Ms. O’Kane answered yes.  She inquired whether the intent was to restore a 
portion of funding for the Art Center. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 6 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Vice Mayor DuBois replied yes. 
Mayor Fine inquired regarding the consequences of restoring partial funding 
for the Art Center. 
Ms. O’Kane advised that Community Services Staff proposed deep cuts.  
There were many options between fully open and complete closure, and 
Staff was able to propose some programming. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested clarification of the amount for the Baylands 
Interpretive Center. 
Ms. O’Kane explained that Open Space Recreation reductions of $275,000 
included the contract for Rangers. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the Baylands Interpretive Center could be 
partially opened with $20,000. 
Ms. O'Kane answered yes. 
Council Member Cormack asked if $400,000 funded all teen services listed 
on Page 3 of the At-Places Memo. 
Vice Mayor DuBois responded yes. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to support the Motion, but the Police 
Department was to lose 17 positions.  Public comment indicated Public 
Safety was the foundation of the community. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by 
Mayor Fine to have two main libraries for the next fiscal year, Rinconada 
with children’s services, and Mitchell Park, and that savings be redirected to 
Public Safety Services.  
Mayor Fine noted the Motion would reduce the savings from the prior day's 
actions to $80,000.  Every department suffered reductions during budget 
hearings.  Rinconada and Mitchell Park Libraries were the largest with 
respect to usage, programming and hours of operation.  Staff's reasons for 
proposing the closure of College Terrace Library may make sense.  All the 
cuts were really, really hard.   
Council Member Kou did not believe the Substitute Motion addressed equity.  
The Substitute Motion did not satisfy the whole community.  A survey found 
public safety and community were most important to the community.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 7 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted public safety always polled very high, and crime 
was not a problem in Palo Alto.  Additional cuts in Public Works was able to 
fund these relatively small amounts.  The Capital Improvement Program 
(CIP) was placed in the Parking Lot.  Surely the Council was able to find one 
or two projects in the CIP that could be deferred to pay for these services 
and police officers. 
Council Member Kniss hoped the Council would begin with the emotional 
issues when it reviewed the budget in the fall.  The Council had to revisit the 
CIP and make difficult choices.  She preferred to cut buildings and continue 
programs for the public. 
Council Member Tanaka stated a 17 percent pay reduction for all employees 
would eliminate the funding gap.  Building projects were able to be deferred.  
Residents used Community Services programs.  The Consent Calendar for 
Monday's meeting contained an item for printing graphics on utility bills at a 
cost of $1.4 million.  That contract paid for the restoration of these 
programs.   
Mr. Shikada commented that Staff had resolved that contract. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED:  2-5 DuBois, Filseth, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
no 
Council Member Filseth asked if the justification for restoring these funds 
was Community Services incurring 21 percent of expenses but being cut by 
27 percent. 
Vice Mayor DuBois replied yes. 
Council Member Filseth emphasized that the proposed funding was $1 million 
per year, not a total of $1 million.   
Vice Mayor DuBois indicated the funding could be offset by reducing 
expenses in another department. 
Mayor Fine reiterated that capital expenses were not comparable to 
operating expenses.  He wanted to fund the programs but, in only 38 
minutes, the Council had effectively eliminated the savings they found the 
prior day. 
Council Member Cormack did not know where Staff could find additional cost 
recovery.  She suggested Council Members consider the Motions as 
temporary decisions until all decisions had been tabulated.  Perhaps the 
Council was able to compile a list of programs to add back when and if 
revenues increased.  The Art Center was well supported by an incredible 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 8 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
group of people.  Volunteers were probably available to operate the Baylands 
Interpretive Centers.  Perhaps teens were able to indicate which programs 
they wanted. 
Council Member Filseth felt this was an ideal topic for the Parking Lot. 
Council Member Kniss had high hopes for recovery, either in 2020 or 2021.  
She proposed placing it in the Parking Lot. 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted teen health had a $225,000 committed funding 
source, and it should not be removed.  The proposal restored an additional 
$135,000 to the General Fund.  He suggested cost recovery could be entry 
fees to the Baylands or art exhibits. 
Mr. Shikada advised that the Substitute Motion could provide the same result 
as the Motion, but it provided an incremental step for discussion of the rest 
of the budget.   
Council Member Filseth wanted to review the rest of the budget before 
adding this funding back to the budget.   
PARKING LOT:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council 
Member Filseth, third by Mayor Fine to place in the parking lot, to direct 
Staff to return with a plan to fund through additional cost recovery and/or 
partial funding: Teen Services ($400,000), Art Center ($400,000), College 
Terrace Library ($168,000), Baylands Interpretive Center ($20,000).  
Ms. Nose asked if Vice Mayor DuBois intended for Staff to return with a plan 
to restore $400,000 to the Art Center or to look at cost recovery measures 
to keep College Terrace Library open.  The amount for College Terrace 
Library was the full closure cost.  The earlier Motion was a swap of funding. 
Mayor Fine explained that Staff should propose cost recovery options where 
they were available.  If none were available, Staff needed to present the 
consequences of restoring the funding. 
Mr. Shikada clarified that the dollar figures were less important than the 
programs.  Staff needed to use their discretion to determine the mix of 
funding that would address the program. 
Vice Mayor DuBois reiterated that the intent was partial funding.   
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council 
Member Kou to direct Staff to return with a plan to fund through additional 
cost recovery and/or through partial funding of: Teen Services ($400,000), 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 9 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Art Center ($400,000), College Terrace Library ($168,000), and Baylands 
Interpretive Center ($20,000). 
MOTION AS AMENDED WITHDRAWN BY THE MAKER.  
Mayor Fine advised Council Members that restoring funding to the budget 
should occur in the budget process.  Exploration of cost recovery needed to 
be placed in the Parking Lot, unless Staff could provide an immediate 
response. 
Ms. O’Kane asked if Staff could propose increased cost recovery for 
Children's Theatre. 
Vice Mayor DuBois answered yes. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE PARKING LOT WITH THE CONSENT OF 
THE MAKER AND SECONDER to, “… Children’s Theater.” 
PARKING LOT AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Kniss moved, 
seconded by Council Member Filseth, third by Mayor Fine to place in the 
parking lot to direct Staff to return with a plan to fund through additional 
cost recovery and/or partial funding: Teen Services ($400,000), Art Center 
($400,000), College Terrace Library ($168,000), Baylands Interpretive 
Center ($20,000), and Children’s Theater.  
Council Member Filseth commended Vice Mayor DuBois for proposing a few 
items rather than the Community Services Budget for the Parking Lot. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether library hours could be shifted to 
weekends and evenings when more of the community used Libraries. 
Mr. Shikada indicated Staff interpreted the restored funding for College 
Terrace Library as an opportunity to rebalance hours of operation. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to change the community's perception of 
reduced hours.   
Mr. Shikada advised that Staff needed to work through that. 
Council Member Tanaka preferred to increase the gap between resident and 
nonresident fees so that resident fees were not so high.   
Mr. Shikada noted the Municipal Fee Schedule would be presented to the 
Council next. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 10 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Cormack requested the likelihood that the JMZ would open 
in March 2021. 
Ms. O’Kane responded very likely.  Construction was ongoing, and Staff was 
constructing exhibits. 
Council Member Cormack asked if opening in March 2021 would help the 
Budget. 
Ms. O’Kane explained that revenue would begin sooner, but Staff would have 
to be hired sooner.   
Council Member Cormack asked which rate Staff recommended. 
Ms. O’Kane advised that the consultant had recommended $10.  Staff 
increased it to $18 to maximize cost recovery. 
Council Member Cormack requested the membership cost for a family. 
Ms. O’Kane reported $150 for residents and more for the plus membership. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to:  
A. 
Recommend tentative approval of the Fiscal Year 2021 Operating 
Budgets for the Community Services and Library Services Departments 
for City Council consideration on May 26, 2020; and   
B. 
Recommend approval of the Preliminary Operating Plan and new 
Municipal Fees for the Junior Museum and Zoo. 
Council Member Cormack did not believe further discussion of this topic 
would be helpful. 
Council Member Kniss remarked that the Council was assuming social 
distancing would not be an issue in March 2021.  After touring the JMZ, she 
knew social distancing would not be possible in the JMZ.   
LONG-TERM PARKING LOT:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by 
Mayor Fine, third by Council Member Cormack to place in the long-term 
parking lot, to direct Staff to return with a report or agenda item on how the 
Junior Museum and Zoo will not be subsidized by the General Fund in the 
future. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 11 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
B. 
Discussion of Fiscal Year 2021 Proposed Municipal Fee Schedule 
Amendments. 
Alexandra Harris, Senior Management Analyst reported fees were imposed 
for City services.  The amount of the fee was typically determined by the 
cost of providing the service or a facility.  As part of the Budget process, 
Staff reviewed Municipal Fees to ensure they were set in accordance with 
applicable State and Federal laws.  Low cost recovery fees were charged for 
activities that the City wished to subsidize.  Medium cost recovery fees were 
typically optional fees for community enrichment programs.  High cost 
recovery fees were charged when the fee payer was the primary recipient of 
a benefit.  Some fees were not restricted by cost recovery requirements.  A 
general rate of increase was calculated annually.  Staff proposed deleting 18 
fees, adding 18 fees and changing 33 fees.   
Council Member Filseth inquired about the circumstances that could result in 
a $500 cleaning fee or a $2,000 filming fee. 
Gayathri Kanth, Interim Library Services Director advised that people wanted 
to film in the Library for magazines, movies and advertisements.  Rinconada 
Library and the secret garden behind Children's Library were very popular for 
filming.   
Council Member Filseth asked if Parking In-Lieu Fees included an allocation 
for land costs or construction only. 
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director explained that the fee was based on 
the incremental cost to add a new parking space.  Due to parking structures 
being built on surface lots only, they did not include a land cost.   
Council Member Filseth believed the land cost should be part of the 
calculation.  If land was utilized for parking, it was not able to be utilized for 
a park or housing or sold to a third party. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to tentatively approve the Fiscal Year 2021 Proposed Municipal Fee 
Schedule Amendments. 
Council Member Cormack noted the Finance Committee usually reviewed the 
Municipal Fee Schedule and rarely revised it.  The Staff Report was clear and 
concise. 
Council Member Kou asked if the Downtown RPP Fee for low-income workers 
had been increase to $50. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 12 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Philp Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official indicated the increase was 
intended to make fees consistent across all RPP districts. 
Council Member Kou believed that amount would be a hardship for low-
income employees.  She requested the amount of the Parking Permit Fee for 
the Downtown garage and lots. 
Mr. Kamhi explained that fees for California Avenue lots were significantly 
lower than lots in other areas of the City.  The increase normalized fees 
across the City.  Staff preferred to raise the fees incrementally rather than 
doubling them from one year to the next.  With the increases, the fees were 
still lower than fees charged in neighboring cities. 
Council Member Kou suggested fees for California Avenue lots should be 
increased to the current fee for Downtown lots.   
Mr. Kamhi clarified that the fee for Downtown lots would be $820 for FY 
2021; therefore, the fee for California Avenue lots needed to be increased to 
$820. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, suggested the Council move the topic to the 
Parking Lot.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the dollar amount or a review of the fees would 
be placed in the Parking Lot. 
Council Member Kou indicated discussion of the right amount and consistent 
pricing could be placed in the Parking Lot. 
LONG-TERM PARKING LOT:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by 
Council Member Cormack, third by Vice Mayor DuBois to place in the long-
term parking lot to direct Staff to return with a discussion of potential price 
increases for Annual Parking Permits to the California Avenue Area parking 
garages and parking lots. 
Council Member Kou asked if a hiring freeze would be a factor in the general 
rate of increase. 
Ms. Harris reported most fees would not change.  Some fees increased to 
maintain the existing cost recovery level.  The increase was not directly 
related to whether a position that might perform the service was vacant. 
Vice Mayor DuBois recalled the Council's discussion of pricing on garage 
parking to encourage use of the garages.  He inquired whether Staff 
considered increasing any of the fees temporarily due to the Budget 
situation. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 13 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Kiely Nose, Chief Financial Officer and Director of Administrative Services 
explained that by law cost recovery could not exceed 100 percent.  Staff 
considered cost recovery requirements and market rates when setting fees. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested the fee for middle school athletics. 
Ms. O’Kane reported Staff proposed a 25 percent increase in fees for middle 
school athletics and adult sports leagues. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired regarding the $1,000 fee for athletics. 
Ms. O’Kane indicated that was the fee for a team, not an individual. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if Staff discussed the fee increase for middle school 
athletics with the Palo Alto Unified School District (PAUSD). 
Ms. O'Kane answered no.  PAUSD provided the space, and the City handled 
all other aspects of the program. 
Council Member Cormack related that the Council could add the Roth 
Building to the discussion.  The City had requested the History Museum host 
the City archives, which were housed at the Library.  The City had some 
unexpended Library Impact Fees.  The Roth Building provided a restroom for 
park users, and there were Park Impact Fees.  The project was shovel-
ready.  Impact Fees were a potential revenue stream for a short time period 
in order to pay for the project.  This was an excellent opportunity to repair a 
City-owned asset.  She proposed a short-term Parking Lot item of 
considering some level of funding from Impact Fees for the Roth Building so 
that construction could begin.   
Council Member Kou concurred. 
Mr. Shikada indicated it would be better discussed under the CIP.  He had 
met with members of the Palo Alto History Museum Board of Directors to 
discuss the latest proposal for construction and funding.  The City Attorney's 
Office and appropriate departments needed to analyze the use of Impact 
Fees for the project.   
Mayor Fine recalled that the Council referred the matter to the Finance 
Committee to evaluate options for repairing the Roth Building, shared use of 
the Building and financing.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if rent charged for property was contained in 
the Municipal Fee Schedule. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 14 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Ms. Nose reported rents were set through leases.  Fees were charged for 
services or activities offered by the City.  Rent for real property needed to be 
discussed under the Administrative Services Department (ASD) Budget. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if all facility rental rates were market. 
Mr. Shikada indicated they were subject to the subsidy policy. 
Council Member Tanaka asked which fees were not at market rate. 
Ms. Nose did not believe Staff could identify which fees were not at market 
rate.  All fees were analyzed for cost recovery level and market feasibility. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed doubling the difference between resident 
and nonresident fees. 
Council Member Cormack requested the three nonresident fees paid most 
frequently. 
Ms. O'Kane advised that nonresidents most frequently paid for facility rentals 
and classes. 
Council Member Cormack requested rough percentages of facility rentals and 
classes that could be attributed to nonresidents. 
Ms. O'Kane replied approximately 15 percent. 
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council 
Member XX to add to the Motion to direct Staff to increase the delta 2X 
between resident and non-resident fees.  
AMENDMENT FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
Council took a break at 3:44 P.M. and returned at 4:01 P.M. 
C. 
Planning and Transportation Services Operating and Capital 
Budgets (Including Respective Special Revenue Funds) 
a. 
Planning and Development Services  
b. 
Office of Transportation.  
Kiely Nose, Chief Financial Officer and Director of Administrative Services 
referred Council Members to the relevant pages in the Operating Budget, 
City Manager Report (CMR) 11322-Attachment A, Exhibit 1, and the At-
Places Memo regarding RPP programs.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 15 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director reported critical 
programming would be maintained, but at substantially reduced service 
levels.  With the elimination of contract services, building inspections were 
occurring approximately five days following calls for service.  By adjusting 
staffing in Long Range Planning and Current Planning, Staff was able to 
advance some of the City Council's priority items.  The Development Center 
remained a cost recovery program.   
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official recommended utilizing License 
Plate Recognition (LPR) technology and virtual permits for the RPP program; 
implementing a small fee for all permits; eliminating the Palo Alto Shuttle; 
and eliminating 0.48 FTE.  Office of Transportation Staff planned on 
continuing to focus on Council priorities and traffic safety-related projects.   
Alison Koo expressed concern about cuts to the Planning and Development 
Services Department affecting the business community. 
Jeremy Erman suggested the City collaborate with the Santa Clara Valley 
Transportation Authority (VTA) and seek a partner for the Palo Alto Shuttle.   
Neilson Buchanan supported Staff's recommendations for the RPP program.   
Eileen Kim believed Staff needed to reconsider implementation of RPP 
districts because a few streets within districts were not subject to the RPP 
programs.  She thought this could increase revenue for the City and prevent 
extended parking.   
Council Member Kniss asked if PAUSD had ever offered to share expenses 
for the Palo Alto Shuttle and if Staff had considered an on-call shuttle 
system. 
Mr. Kamhi indicated PAUSD had not made any offers regarding the shuttle.  
Approximately a third of trips on school days was attributed to school kids.  
On-demand service was the best alternative to shuttle routes.   
Council Member Kniss inquired whether the Palo Alto Shuttle could be 
reinstated in the future. 
Mr. Kamhi responded yes.   
Council Member Filseth asked if there would be significant costs to restart 
the Palo Alto Shuttle in the future. 
Mr. Kamhi replied no because the City did not own the equipment or Staff 
shuttle positions. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 16 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Filseth requested a timeframe for implementing LPR 
technology. 
Mr. Kamhi indicated January 2021 was the likely timeframe. 
Council Member Filseth inquired about contract services for RPP programs. 
Mr. Kamhi advised that contract services would be used for parking 
enforcement.   
Council Member Filseth suspected the community would push back against a 
fee for the first RPP permit if it was presented as a revenue opportunity. 
Mayor Fine recalled Mr. Kamhi stating that the fee would motivate off-street 
parking.  He inquired whether LPR would be used for violations other than 
RPP violations. 
Mr. Kamhi could not speak to anything beyond RPP enforcement. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested the rationale for cutting services that provided 
revenue. 
Mr. Lait explained that the revenues were either equivalent to or less than 
expenses for those services.  All expense adjustments were consistent with 
revenue projections. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked why Code enforcement did not generate revenue. 
Mr. Lait indicated it generated some revenue, but it was not considered a 
stable source of revenue. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if any of the cuts would impact environmental or 
sustainability programs. 
Mr. Lait responded no.   
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to retain no fee for the first RPP permit.  He 
inquired whether Staff was exploring plans to handle increased Single-
Occupancy Vehicle (SOV) trips as commute patterns changed. 
Mr. Kamhi anticipated a shift to SOV trips as people were wary of public 
transit.  Three RPP programs did not provide the first permit free.  
Implementing a fee for all permits provided consistency across programs.  
Staff was developing plans for reviewing RPP programs. 
Council Member Cormack recognized improvements in the RPP and Planning 
permitting processes.  The shuttle was a huge loss.  She suggested Staff 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 17 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
think about collaborating with Stanford University to expand the Marguerite 
shuttle.  She inquired whether the City could terminate the shuttle contract. 
Mr. Kamhi responded yes. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if inspections would be needed prior to 
businesses reopening and the impact of cuts on those inspections.  
Businesses needed to generate revenue quickly, and the City needed sales 
taxes. 
Mr. Lait explained that an increase in development activity could be handled 
with a budget adjustment to increase revenue and expenses.  At the current 
time, elimination of contract services was needed.  Demand for services was 
not predicted.  Staff was going to have to actively manage the situation. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the permitting process could be streamlined 
or if staffing reductions could occur after businesses reopened. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager reported reopening a business did not require a 
permit.  Businesses were going to have to make physical separation and 
operational changes.  Resources were an issue for new businesses and 
businesses moving to new spaces.  Staff had developed a scalable staffing 
model. 
Council Member Tanaka anticipated 20-30 percent of businesses would fail, 
and their spaces would be vacant.  Streamlining the permitting process 
allowed businesses to fill the vacant spaces quickly. 
Mr. Shikada advised that Council action was required to streamline 
permitting processes. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the FTE reduction. 
Mr. Kamhi indicated the position was vacant.  With the hiring freeze, existing 
Staff was going to handle the duties of the position. 
Council Member Kou inquired about the operation of an on-demand shuttle. 
Mr. Kamhi related that funding would be the first requirement for a new 
shuttle and described a partnership and subsidy for pool trips.  VTA was 
offering one-time grants for innovative transit programs. 
Council Member Kou inquired about a legal requirement for the City to 
respond to records requests within a specific period of time. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 18 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Molly Stump, City Attorney reported the City was legally required to respond 
regarding the existence of records within a specific timeframe, but the City 
had discretion about the review and production of records.   
Council Member Kou asked if there was a policy to maintain the 
Development Services Reserve Fund at a certain level. 
Mr. Lait understood the balance of the fund was capped in relation to 
revenues. 
Mayor Fine inquired about funding for the Transportation Management 
Agency (TMA). 
Ms. Nose referred Mayor Fine to the Special Revenue Fund section of the 
Budget.   
Mayor Fine inquired about the effect of the Development Services/Public 
Works Agreement on the Urban Forestry Division. 
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Department Director advised that consultant 
services had been used primarily for plan review and project inspection.  
Most of the contract funding was eliminated, and Public Works Staff was 
going to accommodate the work formerly handled by contractors.   
Mayor Fine asked if cuts to Long Range Planning and Housing were wise if 
the City wanted to reach its transportation, housing and land-use planning 
goals.   
Mr. Lait remarked that the cuts were not desirable, but fiscal constraints 
required adjustments.  All Staff members were working on housing issues, 
but some had more expertise than others.   
Mayor Fine inquired about the impacts of restoring funding to that area. 
Mr. Lait advised that funding would allow Staff to engage a professional with 
experience in developing Housing Elements, to track and respond to changes 
in State law, and to assign resources to the North Ventura Coordinated Area 
Plan (NVCAP).   
Vice Mayor DuBois noted Planning's and Transportation service expenses 
comprised about 10 percent of City expenses, and the departments had 
reduced their budgets by 16 percent.  He inquired about funding for the 
TMA. 
Ms. Nose indicated funding for the TMA was flat. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 19 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to reallocate the funding if it would not be used 
for transit passes during the pandemic. 
PARKING LOT:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth, third by Council Member Kou to place in the parking lot, to revisit 
funding for the Transportation Management Association (TMA).  
Ms. Nose explained that the funding was part of the Downtown Parking Fund 
and could not be reallocated to City expenses.  The City's contract with the 
TMA stipulated funding for the TMA.  The amount of TMA funding was 
possibly going to be reduced through the contract award. 
Mr. Kamhi added that the TMA proposed funding of $500,000 for efforts in 
Downtown and using $250,000 of that amount to establish a TMA for the 
California Avenue area. In the prior Fiscal Year, the TMA received one-time 
donations for use in the California Avenue area.  The TMA hoped the City 
wanted to allocate $750,000 to it and allow the TMA to use a portion of the 
funding in the California Avenue area. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if more money from Special Funds could be 
transferred to the General Fund. 
Ms. Nose indicated the funding was transferred from the Streets 
Improvement Fund for roads and sidewalks.  The funding was a pass-
through from the Gas Tax Fund partially to the Capital Fund and partially to 
the General Fund.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if there were reserve funds. 
Ms. Nose related that some of the Special Funds had reserves.   
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about the source of funding for the Youth 
Connectedness Initiative. 
Ms. Nose suspected the source of funding was Human Services Resource 
Allocation Process (HSRAP). 
Vice Mayor DuBois proposed adding the Youth Connectedness Initiative to 
the Parking Lot. 
Mayor Fine noted the Council had completed the Community Services 
Department Budget. 
Council Member Cormack advised that she add it to the Parking Lot if Staff 
determined it was not incorporated into the previous Motion. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 20 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Tanaka asked about the delay in inspections if contract 
services could be scaled up or down.  He wanted to know how the City could 
help businesses reopen more expediently.   
Mr. Lait explained that Staff performed fire inspections.  The proposal for 
cuts reassigned two fire inspectors to the Fire Department.   
Council Member Tanaka did not believe there should be a delay in fire 
inspections because the number of inspectors was not cut. 
Mr. Lait indicated the fire inspectors embedded within Development Services 
needed to be able to respond sufficiently to fire inspection needs.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if there would be delays in fire inspections. 
Mr. Shikada answered yes, because there were fewer inspectors. 
Mr. Lait advised that contractors had filled four or five building inspector 
positions.  The proposal would cut contract services.  Building inspections 
were to be delayed, and the building community was going to complain.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if there would likely be a revenue decrease. 
Mr. Lait anticipated a revenue decrease and had proposed equal reductions 
in expenses.   
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the number of Code Enforcement 
positions and the duties of the position. 
Mr. Lait advised that one position was filled, and two were vacant.  The 
proposal was to freeze the two vacant positions.  Resources were available 
to support the position. 
Council Member Kou asked if the two positions would be filled when 
revenues returned to normal levels. 
Mr. Lait replied yes, if the City Manager and City Council supported the 
policy direction. 
Council Member Kou hoped the City Attorney would support Staff in ensuring 
fines and penalties were collected.  Transparency was very important, and 
public engagement should not be taken lightly.  Staff did not engage the 
public regarding State laws and their impacts on Palo Alto.  She proposed 
placing presentation of proposed legislation and regional plans to the City 
Council for discussion or a Study Session in the long-term Parking Lot. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 21 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Mr. Shikada reported the issue was the amount of resources available to 
advocate for the City's position on legislation.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if funding for lobbyists would be maintained. 
Mr. Shikada replied yes. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to add the 
Long-Range Planning and Housing Program and related staffing back into the 
Proposed Budget ($273,988).  
Mayor Fine believed the program was extremely important for the 
community.  This program was able to help implement legislation in a way 
that was palatable to Palo Alto.   
Vice Mayor DuBois supported placing it in the Parking Lot.   
Council Member Kou concurred with Vice Mayor DuBois. 
MOTION PASSED:  4-3 DuBois, Filseth, Kou no 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to recommend tentative approval of the Fiscal Year 2021 
Operating/Capital Budgets for the Planning & Development Services 
Department and Office of Transportation Department Budgets for City 
Council consideration on May 26, 2020. 
PARKING LOT:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Mayor Fine, 
third by Council Member Kniss to place in the parking lot the Building 
Inspection and Fire Inspection budget adjustments. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if Staff proposed funding for the NVCAP and 
Grade Separation Projects. 
Mr. Lait reported Staff was searching for funding to continue the NVCAP 
Project. 
Mr. Kamhi advised that work was continuing on the Caltrain Electrification 
Project.  Measure B funding of about $350 million would be available for 
grade separations. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about the dollar amount for building and fire 
inspections. 
Mr. Lait needed some time to analyze methods to return one or two 
positions. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 22 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Kou no 
Council took a break at 5:50 P.M. and returned at 6:34 P.M. 
D. 
Infrastructure and Environment 
a. 
Utilities Department- Operating and Capital  
i. 
Electric Fund  
ii. 
Fiber Optics Fund 
iii. 
Gas Fund 
iv. 
Wastewater Collection Fund  
v. 
Water Fund 
b. 
Public Works Department- Operating and Capital    
i. 
Airport Fund 
i. 
Refuse Fund 
ii. 
Stormwater Management Fund 
iii. 
Vehicle Replacement Fund  
iv. 
Wastewater Treatment Fund 
Kiely Nose, Chief Financial Officer and Director of Administrative Services 
shared the baseline budget summaries for the Utilities and Public Works 
Departments. 
Dean Batchelor, Director of Utilities reported Reserve Fund balances fell 
within guideline ranges.  Utilities was going to have to reduce reserves to 
avoid major service and program reductions.  He summarized proposals for 
rates, capital projects, bond financing, commodity purchases and reducing 
Reserve Fund balances.   
Brad Eggleston, Director of Public Works advised that the balancing strategy 
involved reducing infrastructure maintenance activities in the short term 
without causing long-term consequences to infrastructure and reducing four 
vacant positions and a part-time position.   
Council Member Cormack asked if a Consent Calendar item for Advanced 
Metering Infrastructure (AMI) related to planning or construction. 
Mr. Batchelor indicated the Consent Calendar item pertained to the 
expansion of the fiber network.   
Council Member Cormack explained that the increase in the assessment for 
the San Francisquito Creek Joint Powers Authority related to the 
Environmental Impact Report (EIR).   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 23 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted the Finance Committee was split on the electric 
and gas rates.  Proposed electric and gas rates were cost recovery.  Some of 
the reductions were going to negatively impact sustainability goals and 
cause multiple years of large rate increases.  He inquired whether fiber rates 
were competitive. 
Mr. Batchelor answered yes.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if fiber expansion would be profitable. 
Mr. Batchelor indicated expanding the fiber network would be advantageous, 
but he did not know if it would generate sufficient funds to cover the cost of 
the project.   
Vice Mayor DuBois reported the Utilities Advisory Commission (UAC) had 
recommended rate increases of 2 percent for electric and 3 percent for gas.  
The Finance Committee voted two for 0 percent and one for 2 percent for 
electric and one for 0 percent and two for 3 percent for gas.   
Council Member Cormack clarified that the Staff recommendation for the 
UAC had been 2 percent for electric and 3 percent for gas.  Between the UAC 
meeting and the Finance Committee meeting, the Staff recommendation had 
changed to 0 percent for both gas and electric. 
Council Member Kniss requested Staff's plans for use of the Fiber Fund. 
Mr. Batchelor reported the balance of the Fiber Fund was approximately $34 
million.  Staff had spent $1 million from the Fiber Fund to add conduit to the 
Gas and Water Project in Downtown.   
Council Member Kniss asked how much of the original fiber network had 
been leased. 
Mr. Batchelor indicated about 50 percent.   
Council Member Kniss inquired about efforts to market the fiber network. 
Mr. Batchelor stated Staff had contacted all businesses on University about 
the fiber network prior to beginning the Downtown Gas and Water Project, 
but none was interested probably because they were satisfied with their 
current provider. 
Council Member Kniss inquired about requests to connect to the fiber 
network. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 24 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Mr. Batchelor related that Staff was aware of a few customers who were 
waiting for the network expansion to their areas.  Currently, the fiber 
network was not available for residences.   
Council Member Kniss indicated a few of her neighbors were connected to 
the network.   
Council Member Filseth asked if cross-bore inspections were going to be 
deferred should the Council not support the 3 percent rate increase for gas. 
Mr. Batchelor responded yes.  Staff felt the safety risk of deferring the 
inspections was low based on previous inspections.   
Council Member Filseth asked if inspections were going to continue but on a 
case-by-case basis. 
Mr. Batchelor replied yes.   
Council Member Filseth requested details of renewable energy purchases. 
Mr. Batchelor explained that the Electric Utility purchased Renewable Energy 
Certificates (RECs) 1.  Staff proposed selling RECs 1 and purchasing RECs 3.  
RECs 1 and RECs 3 were both renewable energy products, but RECs 1 were 
in-State products, and RECs 3 were out-of-State products.  The State of 
California did not recognize RECs 3 as renewable energy.  Based on the 
State's regulations, the City's Power Content Label reflected brown power 
based on the purchase of RECs 3.  The cost of power from outside the State 
was much less expensive than power from within California.   
Council Member Filseth asked if the Utility received credit for hydroelectric 
power. 
Mr. Batchelor answered no.   
Council Member Filseth asked if the Utility would be carbon neutral with 
RECs 3, but not as good as with RECs 1. 
Mr. Batchelor clarified that the Power Content Label would not show the 
Utility as 100 percent carbon neutral even though it was. 
Council Member Filseth requested the negative impacts of the Council 
supporting a 0 percent rate increase instead of a 2 percent increase. 
Mr. Batchelor related that $500,000 could fund building electrification. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 25 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Tanaka explained his rationale for supporting a 0 percent 
rate increase for gas at the Finance Committee meeting.  The Council 
increased the gas rate 8.4 percent on July 1, 2019.  Another rate increase 
during an economic depression was not appropriate.  With RECs 3, the 
Electric Utility was still going to be green.  In a few weeks, the UAC would 
consider the advantages of selling RECs 1 and purchasing RECs 3, including 
generating additional income.  He inquired about use of the Solar Calculator. 
Mr. Batchelor advised that it was still in use.  It provided information about 
Palo Alto; whereas, online versions were not location specific. 
Council Member Kou asked if the proposal would eliminate the project to 
plant trees in South Palo Alto. 
Mr. 
Eggleston 
responded 
no. 
 
Ongoing 
funding 
of 
$150,000 
for 
implementation of the Urban Forest Master Plan was going to remain in 
place.   
Mayor Fine requested Staff identify the programs that were proposed for 
two-year savings. 
Mr. Batchelor explained that $18 million in the Electric Fund would support a 
0 percent rate increase for two years.  The $9 million savings was over two 
years.   
Mayor Fine inquired about flexibility in the 34 vacant positions in Utilities. 
Mr. Batchelor clarified that most of the vacancies were in the Electric Utility, 
and most were critical positions of lineperson and operators.  Multiple 
recruitments had not yielded qualified candidates.  Apprenticeships were 
going to be used to fill the positions.   
Mr. Shikada added that the positions were subject to the hiring freeze, and 
requisitions to fill positions were being reviewed individually. 
Jon Abendschein, Assistant Director of Utility Resource Management 
reported that due to two years of 0 percent rate increases for gas, that 
would cause about $13.8 million in reductions to prevent Reserves from 
falling below the minimum guideline.  A 3 percent rate increase caused 
about $2.5 million in reductions.  A 0 percent rate increase for water caused 
no reductions.  A single year of 0 percent rate increases for wastewater was 
going to cause a $1.8 million reduction, and two years of 0 percent rate 
increases was going to cause a $5.5 million reduction.  A 0 percent rate 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 26 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
increase for electric was going to reduce Reserves by $14 million and cause 
$1.5 million in reductions.  A 3 percent rate increase for electric was going to 
reduce the amount taken from Reserves and cause no reductions.  A 2 
percent rate increase for electric was likely going to reduce Reserves by $12-
$13 million. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested a lot of the $12-$13 million would be just 
transmission loss.  He requested the effect of postponing commodity 
purchases. 
Mr. Batchelor indicated the rate increases could be controlled and would not 
be as high in the out years. 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted Public Works' expenses were 22 percent of City 
expenses, but reductions were only 12 percent.  He requested the total FTE 
in Public Works. 
Mr. Eggleston answered 200 with about 50 FTE in the General Fund.  The 22 
percent amount included the General Fund transfers that were originally 
budgeted at approximately $32 million.  The actual Public Works Department 
General Fund Budget was just under $20 million and represented about 8 
percent of the General Fund. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if two custodial positions would be reduced. 
Mr. Eggleston referred to the cross-budgeting of positions.  The proposal was 
to eliminate four full-time positions, two of which were almost entirely 
budgeted to the General Fund, one was budgeted to the Vehicle 
Replacement Fund, and one was budgeted to Capital Funding and Public 
Works General Funding.  In addition, a part-time position was to be 
eliminated. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the positions were vacant. 
Mr. Eggleston responded yes.  No employees would be laid off.  However, 
positions were cut every year over the past several years.  Budgets for the 
past two Fiscal Years resulted in the elimination of 4 FTE. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the proposed cuts were more one-time 
reductions than structural reductions. 
Mr. Eggleston replied yes.  Staff was instructed to view cuts as a two-year 
fiscal emergency and to reduce services for a two-year period such that they 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 27 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
were able to return.  Staff viewed reductions as an opportunity to reduce 
infrastructure maintenance and bring it back after two years. 
Vice Mayor DuBois was surprised by the lack of personnel reductions.  He 
inquired whether reducing the frequency of pickups would provide savings in 
the Refuse Fund.   
Mr. Eggleston advised that State law required weekly garbage service.  He 
thought a discussion of reducing service for recyclables could be worthwhile.   
Council Member Kniss asked if Staff had explored other areas where 
efficiencies would provide savings. 
Mr. Shikada remarked that policy had driven Public Works to achieve the 
Zero Waste goal rather than to minimize costs.  The innovations were 
focused on compostables and recyclables.   
Council Member Kniss asked what happened to residents' recyclables. 
Phil Bobel, Assistant Director of Public Works reported GreenWaste located 
markets in the U.S. for all plastics except dirty film, which was landfill.  
Mixed paper was sent overseas to be recycled.  Staff was attempting to learn 
the end use of mixed paper. 
Council Member Kniss asked if cardboard could be composted. 
Mr. Bobel replied yes.  The economics were better for recycling cardboard.  
The market for cardboard was strong.  
Council Member Tanaka noted electric rates increased 5.5 percent on July 1, 
2019.  Utility rates had been increasing almost yearly.  Commercial Rates 
were much higher than Residential Rates.   
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to accept Staff recommendations of a zero percent rate increase to the 
Electric, Fiber Optics, Gas, Wastewater and Water rates.  
Council Member Tanaka reiterated the series of rate increases, the economic 
depression and the revenue generated by the sale of RECs 1 as reasons for 
zero percent rate increases.   
Council Member Kniss remarked that small businesses were suffering, and 
zero percent rate increases signaled the City's value of small businesses. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 28 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Cormack requested an explanation of the $13 million 
amount for gas. 
Mr. Abendschein explained that Staff would have to make cost reductions in 
that amount to prevent Reserves from falling below the minimum guideline. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the PVC Pipe Project was a seismic issue. 
Mr. Abendschein replied yes. 
Council Member Cormack asked if there was a rate increase between 0 
percent and 3 percent that funded cross-bore inspections. 
Mr. Abendschein thought 2 percent might achieve that. 
Council Member Cormack asked if a 0 percent Wastewater Rate increase was 
proposed for one year or two years. 
Mr. Abendschein indicated Staff recommended 0 percent for one year and 
provided an alternative showing a 0 percent rate increase for a second year 
resulted in deferring a Wastewater Main Replacement Project.   
Council Member Cormack asked about the use of Electric Reserves. 
Mr. Abendschein clarified that $14 million from Reserves and $1.5 million in 
cuts was going to be needed to hold electric rates flat for two years. 
Council Member Cormack asked how many RECs would be sold to fund a 0 
percent rate increase. 
Mr. Abendschein reported RECs could be sold regardless of rates.  The 
Electric Utility had surplus RECs, and they were going to be sold regardless 
of rates.  Trading RECs 1 for RECs 3 realized $3-$6 million in earnings.  
Exchanging RECs generated $3 million.  Selling but not replacing RECs 1 
generated $6 million. 
Council 
Member 
Cormack 
requested 
clarification 
of 
load 
loss 
and 
transmission loss. 
Mr. Abendschein explained that the $14 million in Reserve reductions and 
$1.5 million in cuts were primarily related to an economic downturn for the 
Electric Utility.  Staff projected continued decreases in electric load.  
Combining that with flat rates over two years resulted in a $14 million 
reduction.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 29 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether Staff would reinstate cross-bore 
inspections if gas rates were increased.   
Mr. Batchelor advised that the PVC Project would be the first priority, with 
cross-bore inspections second. 
Council Member Filseth preferred to increase the gas rate given the safety 
issues. 
Council Member Kou wanted to help businesses, but safety was a primary 
concern.   
Vice Mayor DuBois remarked that gas and electricity were both lifelines.  If 
an emergency occurred, Utilities were at risk because of the levels of 
Reserve Funds.   
Mayor Fine indicated $13.8 million in reductions for gas was quite significant 
and affected safety.  He expressed concern about reducing Reserve Funds to 
the minimum guideline.  He inquired about the effect of a 1 percent electric 
rate increase on the Reserve Fund. 
Mr. Batchelor indicated it would reduce the Reserve Fund by about $7 
million. 
Mayor Fine asked if the $1.5 million in cuts would remain. 
Mr. Batchelor responded yes.  A 1 percent rate increase still required the use 
of $13 million from the Reserve Fund. 
Mayor Fine requested the increase in a residential bill for a 3 percent Gas 
Rate increase and a 2 percent Electric Rate increase. 
Mr. Batchelor advised that a residential bill was going to increase about $7 
annually for the gas increase and $15 annually for the electric increase.  A 
commercial bill was to increase $240-$480 annually for the gas increase. 
Council Member Filseth proposed increasing the gas rate to 3 percent and no 
changes in the other rates.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to amend the Motion to only include the 
Wastewater Collection Fund and the Water Fund rates.  
 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 30 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by 
Council Member Kniss to accept Staff recommendations of a 0 zero percent 
rate increase to the Wastewater Collection Fund and Water Fund rates.  
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0  
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois 
to recommend tentative approval of a 3 percent rate increase for one year in 
the Gas Fund. 
Vice Mayor DuBois supported a 3 percent rate increase to fund the AMI 
Project, which saved money over the long term.   
Council Member Cormack stated 3 percent for gas would not fund the AMI 
Project.  She supported a 2 percent rate increase. 
Council Member Filseth asked if a 2 percent rate increase would fund the 
PVC and cross-bore projects. 
Mr. Batchelor answered almost.  Staff was going to find additional savings to 
fund the remainder of the projects. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change the Motion to, “… approval of a 2 
percent rate increase for one year in the Gas Fund.” 
Mr. Batchelor related that a 2 percent Electric Rate increase would increase 
residential bills by $4 annually and commercial bills by $400 annually. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Vice 
Mayor DuBois to recommend tentative approval of a 2 percent rate increase 
for one year in the Gas Fund. 
 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  5-2 Kniss, Tanaka no 
 
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka to recommend tentative approval of a zero percent rate increase for 
one year in the Electric Fund. 
Council Member Filseth noted the Reserve Fund was intended to stabilize 
rates.   
Council Member Tanaka felt there was no better time than now to help 
ratepayers. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 31 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Mayor Fine concurred with Council Member Filseth's comments.  As 
Enterprise Funds, the Reserve Funds were easy to refill.   
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 DuBois no 
Mayor Fine clarified that the rate increases would apply to FY 2020-2021 
only.   
Vice Mayor DuBois requested Staff's original recommendation to increase the 
fiber rate. 
Mr. Batchelor indicated the rate increase was 2.5 percent, which was tied to 
the Consumer Price Index (CPI). 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if that rate increase could fund additional 
expansion of the network.   
Mr. Batchelor replied yes. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to 
recommend tentative approval to restore the planned 2.5 percent rate 
increase for one year in the Fiber Optics Fund. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested a rate increase because the rates were 
currently below market. 
Council Member Tanaka commented that 2.5 percent was significantly higher 
than the current CPI.  This was going to hurt people.   
Council Member Cormack asked if any customers had commented on a 
proposed rate increase. 
Mr. Batchelor answered no. 
Council Member Cormack requested Staff's recommendation for a fiber rate 
increase. 
Mr. Batchelor answered zero percent.  Fiber rate increases had always been 
tied to CPI. 
Council Member Cormack asked how Staff would utilize the increase. 
Mr. Batchelor reported expansion of the network would continue without the 
use of the Reserve Fund.  The Reserve Fund was needed for the AMI Project 
and expansion of the network into residential areas. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 32 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
MOTION PASSED:  4-3 Cormack, Fine, Tanaka no 
Council Member Tanaka noted vehicle replacement should be cut.  He 
inquired about the advantages or disadvantages of paying employees for 
mileage rather than supplying them a vehicle from the City fleet.   
Mr. Eggleston reported Staff discussed paying employees’ mileage for use of 
their personal vehicles, but labor issues were raised.  Staff explored a pilot 
program to utilize a rideshare program, but the City Attorney's Office 
identified a long list of liability concerns with the pilot program.   
Council Member Tanaka proposed placing analysis of reimbursing employees 
for use of their personal vehicles rather than supplying fleet vehicles in the 
short-term Parking Lot.   
Mr. Eggleston added that requiring employees to use their personal vehicles 
on the job was tantamount to encouraging them to commute in their 
personal vehicles.   
Council Member Kniss concurred. 
Mr. Shikada reported Staff had explored this concept over many years.  It 
was not going to generate significant savings and would increase risk. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested elimination of the social media or public 
relations position. 
Mr. Shikada cautioned Council Members and Staff to avoid speaking to 
individuals or individual positions.  There was a communications function 
within the Utilities Department.   
Council Member Tanaka wanted to allocate resources to the areas that 
mattered to the community.   
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member XX 
to eliminate the communications function in the Utilities Department.  
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND. 
Council Member Kou requested an update regarding the Palo Alto Airport. 
Mr. Eggleston reported the Airport began repaying its loan from the General 
Fund in FY 2019-2020.  The Apron Reconstruction Project was large and 
costly.  A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) grant paid 90 percent of 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 33 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Phase I and II costs.  The Airport delayed Phase III because of the small 
amount of revenue.  The FAA had recently announced Phase III would be 
funded at 100 percent.   
Council Member Kou requested the impact on residents of the sidewalks and 
streets program reduction. 
Mr. Eggleston indicated an increase in the Sidewalk Repair Program 
completed the 30 year cycle of repairing all City sidewalks.  For the next two 
years, Staff proposed relying on an in-house crew to perform temporary 
repairs on sidewalks.   
Council Member Cormack noted the wide variety of vehicles in the City's 
fleet.  A small portion of the fleet was sedans.  She inquired about the 
effects of changes in the Capital Budget on the Public Works Department 
Operating Budget.   
Mr. Eggleston reiterated the interrelated nature of the operating, 
maintenance and capital programs. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss 
to 
recommend 
tentative 
approval 
of 
the 
Fiscal 
Year 
2021 
Operating/Capital Budget for the Infrastructure and Environment (Utilities 
and Public Works) for City Council consideration on May 26, 2020.   
Council Member Kniss applauded Staff for turning around the Airport after it 
had operated in the red for so many years.   
MOTION PASSED:  7-0  
Council took a break at 8:47 P.M. and returned at 8:57 P.M. 
E. 
Internal Service Departments and Council Appointed Officers 
Operating Budgets  
a. 
Administrative Services  
b. 
Human Resources 
c. 
Information Technology  
d. 
City Attorney’s Office  
e. 
City Auditor’s Office  
f. 
City Clerk’s Office  
g. 
City Manager’s Office  
h. 
City Council 
Ed Shikada, City Manager requested general direction regarding outstanding 
issues if the Council completed its review of the Budget.  If the Council was 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 34 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
not able to complete their review, they were going to need to determine 
availability for a meeting on Tuesday.   
Kiely Nose, Chief Financial Officer and Director of Administrative Services 
provided a list of Motions affecting Budget amounts and a list of items placed 
in the Parking Lot.  If the Council agreed to revisit the CIP to determine 
savings, that was able to pay for other items, and assuming Staff could find 
$1 million, the Council was going to have approximately $2 million in the 
General Fund to fund proposals to restore funding.  If the Council was able 
to provide direction, Staff was able to return on May 26, 2020 with a revised 
Proposed Budget based on that direction. 
Mayor Fine clarified that a savings of $1 million from the CIP would provide a 
surplus of $2.05 million.   
Ms. Nose indicated a second At-Places Memo regarding requested items and 
General Fund Budget reconciliations was provided.   
Mayor Fine believed the item to understand the sources of Public Safety 
Building (PSB) funding was a longer-term item and could be obviated by a 
CIP reduction. 
Ms. Nose stated that was included in the At-Places Memo. 
Mayor Fine noted the Council had to determine funds that could be found 
through additional cost recovery.   
Ms. Nose advised that the items concerning building and fire inspections and 
the TMA could be determined on May 26, 2020.  The Council's decisions 
regarding the Cubberley and CIP items affected the $2 million surplus.  Staff 
needed to evaluate Police Department positions and were going to provide 
additional analysis on May 26, 2020.  
Council Member Cormack noted the $1.6 million did not exactly match the 
$1.7 million, but it was able to match based on allocating funding to the 
Budget Stabilization Reserve Fund (BSR) or the Section 115 Trust.  She 
asked when the Council could propose additional reallocations. 
Ms. Nose responded Agenda Item Number 7. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested additional budget review could occur during 
the Monday meeting as the Agenda was not packed.  He requested 
clarification of the negative $1.1 million. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 35 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Ms. Nose related that it was the proposal for Staff to review ways to help 
businesses reopen following the Shelter-In-Place Order.  Staff placed the 
item in the Development Center, which was 100 percent cost recovery.   
Vice Mayor DuBois recalled Planning and Development Services Director 
Lait's comment regarding revenue decreases and expense reductions.  Vice 
Mayor DuBois asked if Ms. Nose expected revenues to return. 
Ms. Nose explained that Staff would attempt to balance the $1.1 million 
expense with revenue or reserves. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if it should be a negative or positive $1.1 million. 
Ms. Nose referred to the Motion, which was a reduction of $1.1 million in 
cost savings. 
Mr. Shikada agreed that the Council could review the Budget on Monday, but 
Staff could not fulfill noticing requirements for a meeting on Tuesday if the 
Council did not complete the Agenda and Budget review on Monday.   
Council Member Kniss concurred with finding savings in the CIP.  Parking Lot 
items could involve large amounts of funding. 
Mr. Shikada noted negotiations regarding Cubberley were ongoing, but he 
thought it could provide a reduction of $2.5 million. 
Council Member Kniss remarked that the Police and Fire positions were 
valued by the community, but the expense may be too great. 
Mr. Shikada reiterated that Staff would analyze the positions and report to 
the Council. 
Ms. Nose clarified that Staff had assigned approximate values to the items 
placed in the Parking Lot.  Staff would provide information regarding the 
Parking Lot items on May 26, 2020. 
Council Member Kniss felt the cost of Parking Lot items was confusing as 
some costs had not been determined. 
Ms. Nose reported if the Council's actions regarding the remainder of the 
Budget did not exceed $2 million and the Council completed Budget review 
during the current meeting, the Council was not going to need to meet on 
Tuesday. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding the source of the $272,000. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 36 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Ms. Nose indicated it reflected savings from the JMZ opening in March 2021 
rather than October 2020 and the increase in the JMZ entry fee from $10 to 
$18. 
Council Member Tanaka noted Staff recommended an entry fee of $18.  He 
inquired about the transfer to the Section 115 Trust. 
Ms. Nose explained that a Council decision not to fund the Section 115 Trust 
was going to result in a savings of $1.7 million.  If the decision was to fund 
the Section 115 Trust, the Council was going to need to spend $1.7 million. 
Council Member Tanaka commented that funding the Section 115 Trust 
would not affect the $2 million savings. 
Mr. Shikada advised that Council decisions regarding the Parking Lot items 
with unassigned amounts were the only decisions that would affect the $2 
million savings. 
Council Member Tanaka did not understand the Section 115 Trust having a 
negative amount while the Library item had a positive amount.   
Ms. Nose encouraged Council Members not to consider the amounts 
assigned to Parking Lot items because the Council had not decided those 
items. 
Mayor Fine indicated positive and negative numbers were based on the 
Council's Motions to place items in the Parking Lot. 
Council Member Kou noted funding for Community Services, especially teen 
programs, was long term.  If the Council could find $1 million for short-term 
Parking Lot items, surely the CIP was able to be reduced to fund Community 
Services.   
Ms. Nose clarified that the $990,000 was placed in the short-term Parking 
Lot for further review during the wrap-up meeting.  The Council was able to 
decide to fund the $990,000, which reduced the $2 million surplus.  The 
Council had voted on the items that generated the $2 million surplus.  The 
Council planned on voting on Parking Lot items after they completed the 
Budget review. 
Council Member Kou asked when Staff would revisit the CIP. 
Ms. Nose related that the Council could consider it at the end of the current 
meeting.  Staff was confident a $1 million savings could be found in the CIP. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 37 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether the $1 million placeholder for CIP 
savings was going to affect FY 2020-2021 only. 
Ms. Nose replied correct.   
Council Member Filseth asked if a $1 million reduction in the CIP to fund 
services required a $1 million reduction in the CIP every year. 
Ms. Nose answered yes.  She referred Council Members to the pages in the 
Budget for Internal Service Departments and Council Appointed Officers 
(CAO).  Most of these Budgets totaled $1-$5 million with few FTE.  Most of 
the departments supported the rest of the organization.  The Administrative 
Services Department (ASD) proposed reductions in staffing, the Annual 
Performance Report, and printing services.  ASD was going to continue to 
process payroll, manage property, the treasury,  warehouses and report 
financial information.  The Human Resources (HR) Department proposed 
reductions in staffing and elimination of the HR Contingency Fund.  The HR 
Department was going to continue to support the workforce, Shelter-In-
Place Orders, the Family First Act, and labor negotiations.  The Information 
Technology (IT) Department was funded through an Internal Service Fund.  
The IT Department proposed freezing vacant positions, adjusting service 
delivery and reducing reserves.  The IT Department was to continue the 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) upgrade, Geographic Information 
System (GIS) modernization and the Next-Generation City website.  The City 
Attorney Office proposed reductions in staffing, travel, training and supplies.  
The City Attorney Office was to continue to provide legal support and 
services to the organization and focus on new priorities during the COVID-19 
recovery phase.  The Auditor Office proposed reductions in staffing and 
reassignment of tax compliance and the National Citizens Survey to the City 
Manager Office and ASD.  The City Clerk Office proposed reductions in 
staffing, travel, training, supplies, contract services, Board and Commission 
training and recognition, and printed Agenda Packets.  The City Clerk Office 
was going to continue to support the Council, respond to Public Records Act 
requests, and notice the public.  The City Council eliminated their 
Contingency Fund and were going to reduce travel, training, supplies, and 
meeting meals and snacks.  The City Council was going to continue to lead 
the City and guide Staff's work.  The City Manager Office proposed 
reductions in staffing, travel, training and supplies.  The City Manager Office 
was going to continue to manage the organization and focus on new 
priorities, legislation and business affairs.  The reductions totaled about 11 
percent of the departments' Budgets.   
Council Member Filseth inquired about IT expenses in the General Fund.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 38 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Ms. Nose advised that they could be found in allocated charges under each 
department. 
Jeremy Erman inquired about cost recovery for these departments.  
Immense pressure was applied to programs in the Community Services 
Department to generate revenue. 
Mayor Fine asked if there was a legal requirement for the Council to approve 
their Minutes. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney answered yes, but the format of the Minutes was 
flexible.  The Council had requested verbatim Minutes, but they were not 
required. 
Mayor Fine asked if the Council would continue to approve Action Minutes. 
Beth Minor, City Clerk answered yes.  A few years ago, the Council had 
approved Action Minutes and videos of meetings as the permanent record.  
Other Minutes were provided for the Council's and public's use, and the 
Council did not approve them for each meeting. 
Mayor Fine asked if the City paid for KZSU broadcasts of Council meetings. 
Ms. Minor replied yes. 
Mayor Fine asked if the number of listeners was known. 
Ms. Minor responded no.  There was no means to determine the number of 
listeners. 
Mayor Fine requested the cost of the contract with KZSU. 
Ms. Minor answered $20,000 per year. 
Council 
Member 
Cormack 
asked 
if 
the 
City 
was 
self-insured 
for 
unemployment. 
Ms. Nose replied yes.   
Council Member Cormack requested additional information regarding 
unemployment insurance. 
Ms. Nose explained that it was reflected in the General Benefits Fund, which 
was an Internal Service Fund.  All departments and funds paid into it. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about Staff's confidence that the City was 
able to pay unemployment benefits. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 39 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Ms. Nose advised that Staff was monitoring the situation and Council 
deliberations.  Depending on the final recommended Budget, Staff was able 
to return with adjustments.   
Council Member Cormack remarked that the Council's transition to virtual 
meetings had been incredibly smooth.  IT Staff facilitated training and 
equipment.  She inquired whether sufficient funds remained for attorneys in 
the City Attorney Office to obtain required continuing legal education. 
Ms. Stump indicated options were available for a certain amount of no-cost 
legal education.  She thought Staff may have to request the restoration of 
some funds so that attorneys could maintain their licenses. 
Council Member Cormack assumed videos of Council meetings would 
continue to be available on YouTube and inquired about captioning for the 
videos. 
Ms. Minor indicated captioning was not available through Zoom, but Staff 
could look into it.  Mid Peninsula Media was going to continue to host videos 
of Council meetings. 
Council Member Cormack asked if paid advertising of Board and Commission 
recruitments would be eliminated. 
Ms. Minor clarified that funding for newspaper advertising would be reduced.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether Minutes of Board and 
Commission meetings would be eliminated through the City Clerk's proposal. 
Ms. Minor reported the Community Services Department and the Utilities 
Department determined the format of Minutes and who was going to provide 
the Minutes for the Public Art Commission, the Human Relations Commission 
and the Utilities Advisory Commission.  The Planning Department and the 
City Clerk Office utilized the same transcription company for Minutes. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Council meetings would be a hybrid of in-
person and virtual meetings once the Shelter-In-Place Order allowed in-
person meetings. 
Ms. Minor advised that Staff could look into it.  Members of the public had 
reported that virtual meetings allowed them to participate in more Council 
meetings.   
Council Member Cormack wanted to develop guidelines for Zoom meetings. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 40 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Kniss expressed concern about the Minutes and KZSU and 
requested payment information regarding KZSU. 
Ms. Minor indicated payment was made to Stanford University.  Vince Larkin 
arrived an hour to a half hour prior to every Council meeting, broadcasted 
the meeting during his show, and departed an hour to a half hour after 
meetings concluded.  
Council Member Kniss asked if Mr. Larkin was paid. 
Ms. Minor responded yes. 
Council Member Kniss did not believe Mr. Larkin was highly paid.  Many 
people were going to miss KZSU.  She inquired about reductions to Board 
and Commission training and recognition events. 
Ms. Minor explained that the pandemic prevented training.  The reduction 
eliminated food and participant gifts from recognition events.   
Council Member Kniss asked about City Clerk support for virtual Council 
meetings. 
Ms. Minor advised that two or three Clerks and two IT Staff supported Zoom 
meetings.   
Council Member Kniss felt the proposed Staff reductions in the City Clerk 
Office may be too severe.   
Ms. Minor remarked that two to four Staff members began preparing Zoom 
meetings an hour before the scheduled start time. 
Council Member Kniss inquired about the notification requirements for virtual 
meetings under Governor Newsom's Public Health Orders. 
Ms. Stump reported Governor Newsom issued Executive Orders that 
suspended some noticing requirements of the Brown Act.  The Legislature 
was able to amend the Brown Act to provide some flexibility.  Some aspects 
of virtual meetings had increased public access to government.   
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about the expense for unemployment insurance. 
Rumi Portillo, Director of Human Resources related the expense was 
approximately $175,000. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the Legal Contingency Fund was the Liability 
Insurance Fund. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 41 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Ms. Stump indicated the Legal Contingency Fund was in place for many 
years and was used to pay outside counsel.  Funding allocated to the Legal 
Contingency Fund was always spent for outside counsel services and 
showing it as a contingency was not logical.  To improve transparency, Staff 
moved it into the regular Budget. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested the purpose of the Liability Insurance Fund. 
Ms. Stump related that that was the General Liability Account. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if funding for the account increased. 
Ms. Stump explained that Staff routinely reviewed the risk of cases and 
determined amounts that should be reserved.  The fund was healthy, and 
some funds were reallocated from the fund. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the National Citizens Survey would be conducted. 
Mr. Shikada advised that he needed to explore staffing for the survey.   
Monique LeConge Ziesenhenne, Assistant City Manager indicated it was not 
conducted in the prior year.  She thought conducting it this year may not be 
appropriate during the COVID crisis.  The survey was on hold pending 
staffing or a new process.  Staff was working on a contract and talking with 
the contractor about recommendations for content and timing of the survey.  
The survey was not conducted at the same time of year for every 
jurisdiction.  Staff had arranged for the survey of Palo Alto to be conducted 
in December 2020. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested Staff not add survey questions specific to Palo 
Alto or analyze the results in an effort to reduce costs. 
Ms. Ziesenhenne advised that that could be done.  The survey of Palo Alto 
was more complicated due to the number of questions specific to Palo Alto 
and the increased number of surveys sent to residents.   
Vice Mayor DuBois found the survey informative and felt it should be 
conducted in 2020.  He inquired about the amount of Staff reductions that 
were going to result from layoffs, rather than freezing vacant positions. 
Ms. Nose related that a majority of the positions were vacant, but she could 
not provide the number of layoffs.   
Council Member Kou asked if the City Attorney Office would continue to 
support efforts around airplane noise. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 42 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Ms. Stump clarified that the City Attorney Office's discretionary work 
included the Council's priorities.  With budget reductions and the pandemic, 
Staff was going to have to prioritize and triage its work.  The Council and 
department managers were going to identify the priority projects.   
Mr. Shikada added that City Manager’s Office resources were going to have 
to be reviewed to determine whether work on airplane noise could be 
sustained.   
Council Member Kou asked how the City Attorney’s Office would rank 
prosecution of municipal citations and Code enforcements.  Much of that 
affected the community and potential revenue. 
Ms. Stump reported those were policy questions.  Staff was working with 
clients and determining their capacity to set priorities.  Currently, municipal 
prosecutions were on hold because of a lack of activity and court hearings. 
Council Member Kou appreciated the need to reduce costs, but each Council 
Member needed to determine whether he or she wanted a paper or Digital 
Packet.  She expressed concern regarding the Minutes. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked that YouTube could provide transcriptions 
of segments of meetings.  The list of properties reflected only those that 
were currently rented.  He wanted a list of all City properties.  Renting City 
property at market rate generated a significant amount of revenue.  Most of 
the property was rented at less than $1 per square foot, and some of the 
lessees needed to continue to receive below-market rates.  He inquired 
whether Staff could calculate the total amount of rents if all City-owned 
properties not used by the City were rented at market rate, regardless of 
property condition and availability.   
Ms. Nose related that Staff could not calculate that amount in the current 
meeting.  It should be a Parking Lot item. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the square footage of rental space in the 
City. 
Ms. Nose did not know. 
Mr. Shikada clarified that City-owned property included slivers of rights-of-
way which could not be rented.  Focusing on properties that could be rented 
involved a fundamental policy question for the Council.  Almost all properties 
were charged below-market rates because of Council direction.  The request 
could be a long-term Parking Lot item. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 43 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Tanaka indicated an estimate of the total square footage of 
City-owned properties would be sufficient.  He wanted to increase revenues 
so that expense reductions were not so severe. 
Mr. Shikada suggested it would be at least a year before properties could 
generate rent revenue.   
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about the impacts of the cost reductions on City 
Staff. 
Darren Numoto, Director of Information Technology, reported there would 
be impacts to service delivery and multiple large projects.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the Disaster Recovery Project would continue. 
Mr. Numoto related that Staff always explored methods to increase resiliency 
and was exploring methods with contractors and the SAP upgrade. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired regarding the laptop replacement policy. 
Mr. Numoto indicated the policy would be delayed for a year.  Funding was 
available for critical replacements.  Some laptops were to receive component 
upgrades to facilitate Windows 10 and new applications. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the cycle would increase from three years to four 
years. 
Mr. Numoto reported the current year was the final year of the current cycle, 
and replacements scheduled for the current year were going to be delayed 
for a year. 
Vice Mayor DuBois expressed concern about eliminating verbatim Minutes.  
Video was not the same as searchable text and not transparent for the 
public.  He asked if travel funding was eliminated or reduced. 
Ms. Nose explained that funding was eliminated in the smaller budgets.   
Ms. Stump added that travel was eliminated from the City Attorney’s Office 
Budget. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired whether Staff asked Stanford University to pay 
for the KZSU broadcast of Council meetings. 
Ms. Minor replied no. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the Board and Commission Recognition Event 
would continue without food and gifts. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 44 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Ms. Minor indicated the cost would be approximately $1,000. 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to find low-cost alternatives for Board and 
Commission recognition.  He inquired about the time to discuss management 
compensation. 
Mr. Shikada stated Staff would put that on the Council's Agenda. 
Council Member Tanaka commented that these departments supported 
service delivery rather than delivered services.  Their expenses were to be 
considered overhead.  He requested Staff calculate the savings from a 20 
percent reduction in management and Council salaries.   
Ms. Nose needed time to calculate the amount.  If the Council directed, Staff 
was able to provide information on May 26, 2020. 
Council Member Tanaka felt the leaders of the City should set an example, 
indicate to the community the depth of reductions, and share the pain.   
Mr. Shikada reiterated that Staff was in negotiations with bargaining units.  
The timing of the proposal needed to be synced with conversations.  Staff 
planned on presenting an item soon, concerning this topic for Council 
consideration. 
Council Member Tanaka did not understand asking labor to reduce 
compensation when City management had not done so.   
Mr. Shikada stated the item would pertain to management and professional 
employees.  The Council was able to determine whether it reduced its 
compensation. 
Council Member Tanaka clarified that he was interested in a compensation 
reduction for directors and above. 
Mr. Shikada indicated he had a responsibility to the organization not to 
advance disconnected math.  He wanted to provide recommendations 
regarding the workforce at a later time.   
Council Member Filseth referred to the City Manager's comments and asked 
the Council to move on. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to 
recommend tentative approval of the Fiscal Year 2021 Operating Budget for 
the Internal Service Departments and Council Appointed Officers Operating 
Budgets for City Council consideration on May 26, 2020, plus to explore 
ways to continue to support funding for KZSU. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 45 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
PARKING LOT:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss, third by Council Member Kou to place in the parking lot the full 
minutes. 
Mayor Fine requested the cost of printing Packet materials. 
Ms. Minor indicated printing costs were $34,000, not including the costs for 
delivery to Council Members' homes or Staff overtime. 
PARKING LOT:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council 
Member Kou, third by Vice Mayor DuBois to place in the parking lot the full 
cost of printing packet materials.  
Ms. Minor advised that printing packets was a challenge with clerks working 
from home during the pandemic. 
Vice Mayor DuBois understood the intention was to print packets when Staff 
returned to work onsite. 
Council Member Kou suggested the cost could be less than anticipated as 
some Council Members preferred digital packets.   
Council Member Tanaka noted the number of employees in the City 
Manager's Office and questioned whether the number could be reduced.  He 
asked if the Office of Transportation was part of the City Manager Office 
Budget. 
Mr. Shikada replied no. 
Council Member Tanaka noted City Manager Office staffing expenses of $3.6 
million. 
Mr. Shikada noted a proposed reduction of $250,000 for staffing. 
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council 
Member Kou to reduce the Staff in the City Manager’s Office by two Staff 
members of the City Manager’s choosing.   
Council Member Kou wanted to explore the reduction.   
Mayor Fine asked about the impact of the reduction on the City Manager's 
Office. 
Mr. Shikada iterated that if the City Manager's Office had less Staff, they 
would be completely unfunctional. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 46 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Cormack cautioned Council Members to choose their words 
wisely.  Addressing professionals by titles that did not reflect their 
responsibilities was disrespectful. 
AMENDMENT FAILED:  2-5 Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss no 
Ms. Minor advised that Staff had been exploring the outsourcing of printing 
Council Packets, which reduced the cost of printing.  She said printed 
packets would be available on Monday rather than Thursday.  If Zoom 
meetings and printed packets continued, the loss of City Clerk staffing was 
going to have a great impact on services. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
F. 
Discussion and Direction to Staff Regarding the Establishment of 
a Pension Funding Policy and Approval of Amendment Number 1 
to Contract Number C15159278 to Increase Compensation by 
$97,675 for Additional Actuarial Consultant Services for a new 
Total Not-To-Exceed Amount of $230,000.  (This item has been 
continued to a date uncertain.) 
G. 
May 11, 12, and 13th Budget Hearing Wrap-up Discussion. 
Kiely Nose, Chief Financial Officer and Director of Administrative Services 
requested the Council indicate any areas they wished to revisit or restore.  If 
the Council wished to restore funding to a department, the department 
director wanted to explore the most efficient and effective way to restore a 
service or programming for the designated dollar amount.   
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to: 
A. 
Remove the Section 115 Trust; 
B. 
Cubberley Finances from the short-term parking lot; and  
C. 
Add $1 million in the General Capital Improvement Project Fund cuts 
back into the budget. 
Mayor Fine clarified that these items were open for discussion, and the 
remaining items were going to be discussed on May 26, 2020. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff wanted Motions or comments. 
Ms. Nose reported the Council did not act to change the assumptions for the 
Section 115 Trust or Cubberley finances.  Council direction to remove them 
from the short-term Parking Lot was sufficient.  Reducing the CIP by an 
additional $1 million required a Motion. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 47 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Mayor Fine indicated that is the intent of the Motion. 
Council Member Cormack recalled the City Manager's statement that the 
information regarding Cubberley was accurate.  She wanted to hear Council 
Member Filseth's comments regarding the Section 115 Trust.  She wanted to 
understand the projects affected by the $1 million CIP reduction.  She 
expressed concern regarding maintenance of parks when residents were 
using them heavily during the shelter-in-place order.  She did not agree with 
reducing Police Department staffing by 17 positions.   
Mayor Fine noted Staff could provide details of reductions in the CIP. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to increase the CIP reduction to increase 
funding for the Police Department and Community Services Department.  
More CIP projects should be delayed.   
Council Member Filseth supported removing Cubberley from the Parking Lot.  
Allocating anything less than $1.7 million to the Section 115 Trust was 
essentially borrowing money at 6.2 percent interest to pay expenses.  It was 
worse than a one-time deferral of a Capital Project.  He preferred using the 
BSR than borrow funds.  There was a difference between the normal cost 
and paying down the existing liability.  Not covering the normal cost accrued 
new liability.  Not paying on the existing liability was not good either.  He 
inquired about the projects affected by the $1 million CIP reduction.  The cut 
to the Capital Plan over the next five years was to be quite a bit larger than 
Staff's $46 million estimate.  That was possibly the result of the amount 
Staff believed could be restored in the out years.  Some of the cuts 
appeared to be permanent.   
Mayor Fine noted the Motion restored 50 percent of funding to the Section 
115 Trust.  Another $1.6 million was reserved from capital.  He inquired 
whether the 50 percent and $1.6 million was going to total the normal cost. 
Ms. Nose answered yes. 
Mayor Fine requested an overview of the $1 million CIP reduction. 
Ms. Nose advised that the CIP would be reduced by a total amount of $2.6 
million, $1.6 million for the BSR or Section 115 Trust and $1 million.  Half 
the reduction was going to come from the Downtown Parking Garage Project 
in that Staff would cancel the design contract.  Funding sources for the 
remaining half was going to be for ongoing projects, Impact Fees slated for 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 48 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
dog parks, and carryover from 2020 savings.  Ongoing projects included off-
road pathways, repairs, and ADA compliance. 
Mayor Fine remarked that in a normal year, the transfer to capital was going 
to be $32 million.  Staff reduced that amount to $16 million, and the Council 
reduced the amount by an additional $2.6 million.  The capital transfer was 
going to be reduced about 60 percent in order to fund services and other 
needs. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if transferring $3.3 million to the Section 115 Trust 
covered the normal cost. 
Ms. Nose responded yes. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired whether use of the 2020 carryover would cause 
the cancellation of a project. 
Ms. Nose advised that ongoing projects, such as sidewalk repairs and 
maintenance, were to be reduced.  Staff had evaluated the carryover 
amount in February and May 2020 to determine the potential carryover 
amount.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the reduction could be increased to $1.5 million. 
Ms. Nose indicated exceeding $1 million was likely going to affect projects. 
Vice Mayor DuBois commented that several important organizations would 
lose their spaces at Cubberley.  He supported allocating $1.7 million to the 
Section 115 Trust rather than the BSR.  His impression from the discussion 
was that police officers were not going to be laid off. 
Ms. Nose reported if all reductions for the Police Department were 
implemented immediately, it would impact sworn positions.  The Police Chief 
wanted to retain new employees and requested flexibility to reduce the 
number of positions through attrition.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “Dedicate $1.6 million 
reduction in Capital Improvement Project Fund to the Section 115 Trust 
Fund.” (New Part D) 
Council Member Filseth wanted to ameliorate some of the Police Department 
reductions.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 49 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to increase the $1 million CIP reduction. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to: 
A. 
Remove the Section 115 Trust from the short-term parking lot; 
B. 
Remove the Cubberley Finances from the short-term parking lot;  
C. 
Add $1 million in the General Capital Improvement Project Fund cuts 
back into the budget; and 
D. 
Dedicate the $1.6 million reduction in Capital Improvement Project 
Fund to the Section 115 Trust Fund. 
MOTION SEPARATED FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED FOR MOTION PART A:  6-1 Kou no 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED FOR MOTION PART B:  6-1 Tanaka no 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to update the Motion, Part C to read, “cut an 
additional $1 million from the General Capital Improvement Fund and reduce 
the General Fund Transfer to the Capital Improvement Project Fund by a 
corresponding amount.” 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED FOR MOTION PART C:  6-1 Tanaka no 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED FOR MOTION PART D:  6-1 Kou no 
Ms. Nose advised that the Council had $2 million.  Minutes transcription and 
Packet printing remained in the Parking Lot.  She requested the Council 
direct Staff to explore restoring services with some of the $2 million or to 
allocate it to the BSR.  She thought the Council should not spend the full $2 
million as there were Parking Lot items to consider. 
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kou to remove the College Terrace Library from the parking lot.  
Council Member Tanaka noted community support for College Terrace 
Library.   
Council Member Kniss did not support this without considering other items. 
MOTION FAILED:  3-4 Cormack, Filseth, Fine, Kniss no 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 50 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager suggested the Council identify $1 million in 
restorations. 
Council Member Kniss asked if the Council could designate funding by 
department. 
Ms. Nose replied yes.  She requested the Council not designate funding for 
specific line items. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the number of cuts to the Police 
Department. 
Ms. Nose responded slightly more than $6 million in total. 
Mr. Shikada requested the Council identify additional priorities for $1 million. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested the Council add items to the short-term 
Parking Lot and direct Staff to explore funding for all short-term Parking Lot 
items. 
Mayor Fine believed that could result in a number of votes on items with 
only three Council Members supporting the items. 
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to allocate $1 million back into the budget to address the following 
areas:  60 percent Police Department and 40 percent Community Services 
Department.  
Council Member Tanaka requested clarification of the Motion. 
Ms. Nose explained that Staff would return with recommendations based on 
the Council discussion and priorities for restoring services proposed for 
reduction in the Police and Community Services Departments.  
MOTION PASSED:  7-0  
Mayor Fine noted the more items the Council moved to the Parking Lot, the 
fewer funds could be allocated to each. 
Council Member Kou related that the Youth Connectedness Initiative was a 
suicide prevention program for youth.  Without City funding, the Initiative 
was going to lose matching funds from the County of Santa Clara (County).  
Public comments indicated many youth found the program helpful.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 51 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
PARKING LOT:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss, third by Council Member Tanaka to place in the parking lot the Youth 
Community Service Youth Connectedness Initiative of $50,000. 
Vice Mayor DuBois understood the $1 million could cover all items in the 
Parking Lot.  The Council just restored $400,000 to the Community Services 
Department.  He asked if funding for the Youth Connectedness Initiative was 
included in the $400,000. 
Mr. Shikada indicated the department would want to recommend priorities 
for that funding.  The priorities possibly included the Youth Connectedness 
Initiative.   
Vice Mayor DuBois stated the Motion indicated a Council priority for funding 
the Youth Connectedness Initiative. 
LONG-TERM PARKING LOT:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by 
Council Member Kou, third by Council Member Filseth to add to the long-
term parking lot to direct Staff to analyze a re-balance of the Capital Fund to 
contribute to the Roth renovation, with the use of impact fees and up to $1 
million from the General Fund, a preference for impact fees, and to refer the 
results to the Finance Committee.  
Council Member Filseth asked if this would constrain the Budgeting process 
in the short term. 
Mayor Fine suggested this was an attempt to use the Budget process and 
the three-vote rule to redirect a majority Council decision on policy. 
Vice Mayor DuBois clarified that he proposed Staff analysis, not a 
commitment of funding. 
Ms. Nose advised that Staff present the long-term Parking Lot for Council 
approval as part of Budget adoption.   
Mr. Shikada added that Staff would review Impact Fees and their use in 
restoring funding to Community Services and Library Departments. 
Council Member Filseth asked if Staff had time to analyze the proposal within 
the relevant timeframe. 
Mr. Shikada indicated Staff would need to confer with the Palo Alto History 
Museum and were likely able to perform the analysis in a timely manner. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 52 of 52 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes: 05/13/2020 
 
Council Member Filseth was not prepared to commit $1 million from the 
Proposed Budget to the Roth Building. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about information concerning Impact 
Fees. 
Mr. Shikada suggested the Palo Alto History Museum Board Members had 
emailed Council Members about the use of Impact Fees.   
Council Member Cormack requested Staff forward emails to Council 
Members.   
Vice Mayor DuBois explained that the Board Members had some ideas for 
using Impact Fees, but Staff needed to analyze the ideas. 
Ms. Nose thanked the many Staff members that supported her reports to the 
Council. 
Adjournment This meeting was adjourned at 11:51 P.M.  
