CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 29 
Special Meeting 
June 22, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date via Virtual 
Teleconference at 5:01 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH LABOR NEGOTIATORS 
City Designated Representatives: City Manager and his Designees 
Pursuant to Merit System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada,  
Rumi Portillo, Molly Stump, Monique LeConge Ziesenhenne,  
Nick Raisch, Kiely Nose, Gina Roccanova) 
Employee Organizations: Utilities Management and Professional 
Association of Palo Alto (UMPAPA); Service Employees International 
Union, (SEIU) Local 521; Service Employees International Union, (SEIU) 
Local 521, Hourly Unit; Palo Alto Police Officers Association (PAPOA); 
Palo Alto Fire Chiefs’ Association (FCA) and Employee Organization: 
International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF), Local 1319; Palo Alto 
Police Manager’s Association (PAPMA) 
Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6(a). 
Jeremy Erman hoped the negotiations would include a dialog.  regarding 
alternatives to laying off workers.  He urged the City representatives to listen 
to workers.   
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to go 
into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:05 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 5:52 P.M. 
Mayor Fine announced no reportable action. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Study Session 
2. 
3300 El Camino Real (20PLN-00101): Request for Pre-screening of a 
Proposal to Rezone the Subject Property From Research Park (RP) to 
Planned Home Zoning (PHZ) and to Redevelop the Site With a Mixed-
Use Development That Includes Approximately 52,500 Square Feet (sf) 
of Office; 4,400 sf of Ground Floor Retail, and 187 Residential Units. 
Environmental Assessment: Not a Project; any Subsequent Formal 
Application Would be Subject to the California Environmental Quality Act 
(CEQA). Zoning District: RP. 
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning and Development Services reported 
housing production was not meeting the Comprehensive Plan goal but was 
just sufficient for Senate Bill (SB) 35 standards.  Staff anticipated the City's 
Regional Housing Needs Assessment for the upcoming cycle would be three 
times the current cycle.   
Claire Raybould, Senior Planner advised that the applicant proposed changing 
the zoning of the site from Research Park (RP) to Planned Home Zoning (PHZ).  
Nearby zoning included RP and Commercial Service (CS).  The nearby CS and 
RM-20 zones contained a mix of commercial and multifamily residential uses.  
Buildings surrounding the site were generally one and two-story.  While the 
Communications and Power Industries (CPI) site abutted the subject site, the 
CPI building that contained hazardous materials was located more than 300 
feet from the proposed mixed-use site.  The applicant proposed separate 
buildings for the commercial and residential uses.  The office/retail building 
would have a floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.4 and a height of 35 feet.  The 
multifamily residential building was to contain 187 units and have a FAR of 
1.39 and a height of 60 feet to the sloped roof and 67 feet to the top of the 
elevator shaft.  The applicant proposed 352 parking spaces in a single-level 
underground garage.  The density of the project was to be 62 dwelling units 
per acre.  Staff sought the Council's feedback regarding the height of the 
residential building, FAR, and parking.  A utility easement was located across 
the site and needed to be relocated or otherwise resolved.  According to the 
PHZ, the project had to provide 20 percent inclusionary housing and offset 
onsite job creation with housing units.   
Alison Koo, Sand Hill Properties indicated Palo Alto's office market in general 
and the Stanford Research Park market specifically were experiencing 
increasing vacancies and softening rents.  An economic analysis found that 
increasing the inclusionary requirement greater than 15 percent severely 
impacted the economic viability of a project.  The applicant proposed a 20 
percent inclusionary requirement because the mixed-use component and the 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
office use subsidized affordable housing units.  The site was located near 
transit, important employers, and grocery stores.   
Bob Giannini, Form 4 Architects related that the site could accommodate a 
52,000-square-foot office building, surface parking, and underground parking 
or a 52,000-square-foot office building, underground parking, and a 
residential building.  The applicant proposed 50-foot setbacks from Hanson 
and the south property line and a 20-foot setback from El Camino.  The 
driveway from El Camino was to remain, but the driveway from Hanson Way 
was able to be eliminated.   
Arthur Liberman remarked that residents wanted housing but not office space.  
The height of the residential building, the driveway onto El Camino, and the 
lack of a barrier or interface with 607 Hanson Way were concerns for the 
community. 
Rebecca Eisenberg was not pleased with the idea of another technology 
company moving into Palo Alto because they increased traffic and pollution 
and used public resources.  Residents had to pay for these impacts because 
the City Council did not tax businesses.   
L. David Baron commented that the project was a good alternative to one that 
was compliant with the existing zoning for the site.  The ratio of office to 
housing was not going to help the Bay Area's housing shortage.  He 
encouraged the Council to reduce parking requirements and increase the 
allowed FAR and building height.   
Aaron Eckhouse concurred with Mr. Baron's comments.  This site was an 
opportunity for housing, and the project was able to provide as much 
affordable housing as had been approved in the past five years.   
James Hindery expressed concern regarding the driveway to El Camino and 
the amount of parking dedicated to the office building.   
Ryan Globus appreciated the number of affordable housing units and the 
location near transit.  This was a great opportunity for affordable housing. 
Rohin Ghosh believed the project could include more housing units.  The City 
needed to increasing housing development. 
Kelsey Banes supported the project.  The residential building was able to be 
two stories taller without needing a more expensive type of construction. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Kevin noted recreational vehicles were usually parked along El Camino.  
Project design was not to be focused on parking.  He suggested the City 
continue work on the Housing Work Plan. 
Mitch Mankin, Silicon Valley @Home, encouraged the Council to support the 
proposal and consider steps that would advance housing development on the 
site.    
Sara Ogilvie was excited by this opportunity for housing and urged the Council 
to consider lifting some restrictions on development.  The project was to be 
near amenities and transit.   
Mircea Voskerician was excited by the prospect of additional housing.  Five-
story buildings were common along El Camino Real.   
Becky Sanders suggested the Council encourage the applicant to provide more 
housing.  Increasing the height and FAR was to benefit developers, not the 
City.   
Angela Evans wanted the Council to think about this project creatively and 
flexibly in order to achieve the greatest number of homes at the deepest levels 
of affordability.  She asked the Council not to push the developer into an 
office-only development. 
Council Member Kniss noted the City's Affordable Housing Fund was virtually 
empty.  This was an ideal location for a mixed-use project.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether the choice was housing or a 
parking lot. 
Mr. Lait explained that the project could propose an office use only and comply 
with the Code.  The PHZ was to add housing and parking sufficient for both 
uses. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the housing and office uses would share the 
parking. 
Mr. Lait answered yes, with a 10-15 percent reduction in required parking. 
Council Member Cormack requested the height of Palo Alto Square. 
Ms. Raybould seemed to recall a height of ten stories. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether Staff anticipated the project would 
be consistent with the El Camino Real Design Guidelines and the North Ventura 
Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP). 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Mr. Lait explained that Staff would thoroughly review a formal application in 
light of the El Camino Design Guidelines.  Staff had not identified any major 
compliance issues with the conceptual plan for the project. 
Council Member Cormack asked if 187 housing units would be more than half 
of the Comprehensive Plan's annual goal for housing production. 
Mr. Lait replied yes. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the housing would be rental or ownership. 
Ms. Raybould responded rental. 
Council Member Cormack requested clarification of the proposed building 
heights. 
Mr. Lait explained that the height to the top of the roof would be 50 feet.  With 
a pitched roof, the height was to be at least 60 feet.  A stairwell and elevator 
shaft was to increase the height to 67 feet. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the roof would be decorative or functional. 
Ms. Raybould advised that the applicant proposed a rooftop open space.  The 
60-foot height was to extend to the top of the railing. 
Council Member Cormack believed a pitched roof would be responsive to the 
area and more attractive than a flat roof.  The setback appeared to eliminate 
the possibility of the building creating a canyon effect. 
Council Member Kou noted the Council would not discuss the Planned Home 
Zone until the following day.  The project was introduced as housing when it 
included 52,500 square feet of office space and very little retail space.  The 
project did not provide any amenities for residents of Ventura or Barron Park.  
Public comment addressed housing but not the office space contributing to the 
jobs/housing imbalance.  She had concerns about the developer and wanted 
to see conditions imposed on the developer if it submitted an application. 
Council Member Filseth understood the dynamics of subsidizing affordable 
housing, but 50,000 square feet of office space was possibly another 100 
housing units.  He preferred to limit the building height to 50 feet.  If the 
Council allowed a greater height, they needed to require more affordable 
housing.  Parking for the project had to be scrutinized.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the proposed commercial square footage would be 
counted towards Stanford Research Park's remaining square footage. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Mr. Lait responded yes, but the remaining amount was significant. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired regarding the rationale for splitting the parking lot 
from the building. 
Mr. Lait referred the question to the applicant. 
Vice Mayor DuBois expressed concerns about the developer given the 
developer's past actions and the toxic plume; he wanted to understand the 
historic nature of the Varian Headquarters Building; and expressed interest in 
landscaping along Hanson Way.  This was a great site for housing.  This type 
of project was not what he had in mind for the PHZ.  If the applicant replaced 
the office space with housing and included a decent amount of inclusionary 
housing, he was open to extending even more public benefits.  A building 
height of 35 feet with a pitched roof was acceptable.   
Council Member Tanaka suggested the developer move the residential space 
away from traffic by placing office on the ground floor of the residential 
building or constructing an L-shaped office building between the residential 
building and El Camino.   
Mayor Fine requested the mechanism for implementing the PHZ.   
Ms. Raybould explained that the site would be rezoned from RP to PHZ.   
Mayor Fine asked if the developer could construct the office space but not the 
residential space under the RP zoning. 
Ms. Raybould replied yes. 
Mayor Fine asked if the PHZ enabled the residential space. 
Mr. Giannini answered yes. 
Mayor Fine noted 50,000 square feet of office space could be built on the site 
under the existing zoning.  The Council's preference was 100 percent housing, 
but this was possibly going to be a new neighborhood for Palo Alto.  He 
inquired regarding the lot adjustment. 
Mr. Giannini explained that an adjustment of the lease line with the adjacent 
property was needed to provide the proposed underground garage.   
Mayor Fine remarked that the project met the Council's goals of 20 percent 
inclusionary housing and not increasing the jobs/housing imbalance.  An 
aggressive approach to housing units and affordability levels enhanced the 
Council's reception of a project.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
NO ACTION TAKEN  
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor Fine requested modifications to the current Agenda and the Agenda for 
June 23, 2020.   
Vice Mayor DuBois expressed concern regarding the length of the Agendas for 
June 22 and 23, 2020.  The Council was going to have to truncate either public 
comment or Council discussion.  Perhaps a Special Council Meeting was to be 
scheduled next week or the following week. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to do 
a check-in at 10:30 P.M., and move Agenda Item Number 9 on June 23, 2020 
Action Agenda to the June 23, 2020 Consent Calendar.  
MOTION PASSED:  4-3 Cormack, Kniss, Tanaka no  
Council Member Cormack inquired about a process for Council Members to 
request information regarding Agenda Item Number 9 on the June 23, 2020 
Consent Calendar.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney advised that three Council Members could agree 
to remove it from the Consent Calendar. 
Mayor Fine asked if Staff could respond to a few questions about Agenda Item 
Number 9 from Council Members prior to the meeting. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager indicated Staff would attempt to respond to 
questions prior to the meeting. 
Council Member Tanaka was able to support scheduling an additional Council 
meeting so that the Council was able to address all Agenda Items fully. 
Council Member Kniss requested the City Manager address Staff's ability to 
support an additional meeting. 
Mr. Shikada related that an additional meeting was going to be difficult to 
schedule as Staff had planned vacations around the Council break.   
Council Member Kniss asked if the Council would receive public testimony 
regarding Foothills Park access and continue the discussion to August or 
September 2020. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Mr. Shikada clarified that the Agenda Item pertained to receipt of the Parks 
and Recreation Commission's Report and direction to Staff.  The item was 
going to need to return to the Council at a future date for specific action. 
Council Member Cormack preferred to complete the Agendas as scheduled.   
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to 
defer Agenda Item Numbers 6 and 8 on the June 23, 2020 Agenda to a date 
after the Council summer recess. 
Mayor Fine noted Agenda Item Number 6 was Foothills Park access, and 
Agenda Item Number 8 was the Planned Home Zoning. 
MOTION PASSED:  5-2 Cormack, Fine no 
Mayor Fine noted the Council's workload and felt rearranging Agendas at the 
last minute was a disservice to Boards, Commissions, Staff and the 
community.  The Foothills Park Item was ready since November 2019.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the possibility of the Council discussing 
a proposed ballot measure to allow 16-year-olds to vote.   
Ms. Stump explained that Staff could not accommodate the Brown Act 
requirement for noticing an amended Agenda for June 23, 2020. 
Oral Communications 
Rachel Owens, Vote 16 Palo Alto urged the Council to agendize a discussion 
of a ballot measure lowering the voting age for City Council elections for June 
23, 2020.   
Katherine Causey supported Vote 16 Palo Alto.  A study had suggested that 
16-year-olds were prepared to vote responsibly.  She strongly urged the 
Council to consider the measure and agendize a discussion of the topic. 
Frida Rivera supported Vote 16 Palo Alto because 16 and 17-year-olds were 
sufficiently mature to vote.  She encouraged the Council to agendize a 
discussion for June 23, 2020 or after the Council break.   
Yael Sarig supported Vote 16 Palo Alto as a way to address the national voting 
problem.  The best way to enact change was through the ballot. 
Dia Dhariwal supported Vote 16 because voter turnout was abysmal and 
referred to studies regarding first-time voters.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Ishani Raha supported granting the right to vote to 16 and 17-year-olds and 
discussed the concept of voter inertia.   
Benjamin Stein noted students were leading the fight for racial equality.  
Allowing 16-year-olds to vote would increase voter turnout, and 16-year-olds 
had earned the right to vote. 
Antonia Mou supported Vote 16 Palo Alto because local elections were crucial 
to achieving change in the community.  Lowering the voting age improved 
voter turnout, established lifelong voting habits, and drove demand for 
effective civic education.   
Michaela Seah supported Vote 16 Palo Alto because 16 and 17-year-olds were 
constituents of the City Council.  The Council made Budget decisions that 
affected community youth.   
Miranda Li supported Vote 16 Palo Alto because it allowed youth to become 
engaged in politics and established a lifelong voting habit.   
Thomas Li supported the request for the Council to lower the voting age for 
City Council to 16 years of age.  Youth cared about the community and 
progress.   
Doug Owens supported Vote 16 Palo Alto and noted the Council's failure to act 
delayed the potential ballot measure for two years.   
Lucy N supported Vote 16 Palo Alto because youth deserved a voice in 
community decisions.   
Allison Mou supported Vote 16 Palo Alto because Council Member must serve 
all constituents.  Youth were engaged in social justice issues that affected the 
community.   
Margaret Adkins did not understand how the Council could reject Service 
Employees' International Union's (SEIU) offer of more than $3 million in 
concessions.  In addition, the Council had reduced the Professional and 
Management Employees' furlough concessions by 50 percent and expended 
$480,000 in early retirement incentives. 
Chris Brickner commented that SEIU offered concessions that exceeded the 
$3 million the City had requested.  Each time, the City rejected the 
concessions, indicating they were not sufficient.   
Sarah O’Riordan supported Vote 16 Palo Alto and implored the Council to 
agendize a discussion as soon as possible. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Johannah Seah supported Vote 16 Palo Alto because youth should be engaged 
in democracy.   
Eve Donnelly supported Vote 16 Palo Alto because it improved voting habits 
and create lifelong voters.   
Ryan Globus urged the Council to return Agenda Items 6 and 8 to the June 
23, 2020 Agenda.   
Kimberly Thacker requested the Council restore funding for Staff positions to 
Children's Theatre.  Friends of Palo Alto Children's Theatre was to raise funds 
for programming.   
Abby Lang concurred with Ms. Thacker's comments. 
Kareem El-Badry commented regarding a Police Officer's alleged brutal and 
racist actions.   
Lisa Rock, Palo Alto Community Child Care (PACCC) Executive Director 
expressed concern for the future of childcare providers in the community.  
PACCC was serving approximately 25 percent of its former enrollment and 
expending more for staff and sanitation because of public health 
requirements. 
Rachel Samoff requested the Council consider the needs of the childcare sector 
in its Budget decisions.  Without additional funding, the shortage in childcare 
was to increase.   
Jonathan Erman appreciated the COVID-19 testing offered the prior week.  
The giant screen in the lobby of City Hall was a symbol of the Council's 
misplaced priorities.  City employees were not supposed to be losing their 
jobs.   
Jonathan Sneh urged the Council to agendize a discussion of Vote 16 Palo Alto 
and to consider the Friends of Palo Alto Children's Theatre's offer to fund Staff 
positions. 
Hsinya Shen, Palo Alto Public Art Commission (PAC) requested the Council 
reconsider their decisions to suspend the Percent for Art Program and to 
reduce the number of Public Art Commissioners.   
Katie Brown encouraged the Council to restore funding for the Staff of Palo 
Alto Children's Theatre and to consider the Friends of Palo Alto Children's 
Theatre's Budget proposal. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Jeremy Erman questioned Staff's sending eviction notices to tenants at 
Cubberley without Council authorization.  Staff's actions were outrageous and 
unethical. 
Shayan Hooshmand shared his positive experiences with the Palo Alto 
Children's Theatre and encouraged the Council to accept the Friends of Palo 
Alto Children's Theatre's offer for funding. 
James Hindery supported Vote 16 Palo Alto and restoring funding to 
performing arts and objected to the Council continuing Agenda Item Numbers 
6 and 8 from June 23, 2020.   
Rohin Ghosh concurred with comments regarding Vote 16 Palo Alto and 
supported City workers.  The Police Department did not protect citizens of Palo 
Alto.   
Lisa Trovato requested the Council consider the Friends of Palo Alto Children's 
Theatre's offer for funding  
Xander Koo believed the Council should act immediately to end exclusive 
access to Foothills Park, to promote affordable housing, and to consider the 
ballot measure by Vote 16 Palo Alto. 
Madison Abbassi supported Vote 16 Palo Alto because youth voices should be 
included in the decision-making process.   
Sofia Rakicevic-More appreciated the Palo Alto Children's Theatre and their 
Staff and artists.  She encouraged the Council to consider the Friends of Palo 
Alto Children's Theatre's proposal. 
Rebecca Eisenberg commented that none of the items on the Consent 
Calendar complied with requirements of the Brown Act.  She supported the 
Vote 16 Palo Alto folks.   
Grace Mah supported Vote 16 Palo Alto's efforts to lower the voting age and 
funding for childcare services.   
Ben Miyaji, Public Art Commission, Chair reported the call for artists had been 
released for the Black Lives Matter Project on Hamilton Avenue.  The artwork 
needed to be complete by June 30, 2020.   
Anna Meyer supported Vote 16 Palo Alto and urged the Council to consider the 
measure. 
Owen Longstreth supported Vote 16 Palo Alto and inquired about Budget cuts 
for the racist Police Department. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Eileen Kim requested the Council remove from the Consent Calendar the non-
reduction of salaries and allocate funding for youth programming. 
Blake Mathews advocated for additional funding for the Palo Alto Children's 
Theatre.   
Adie Katzenelson appreciated the skills she had learned through Palo Alto 
children's Theatre. 
Roberta Ahlquist addressed racism and the need for worker housing in Palo 
Alto. 
Martha Walters expressed concern about the potential elimination of Staff 
positions due to Budget cuts. 
Curtis Smolar remarked regarding unoccupied office space in Palo Alto, 
continuation of Agenda Item Numbers 6 and 8 for June 23, 2020, and Budget 
reductions. 
Minutes Approval 
3. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the June 8, 2020 City Council Meeting 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to approve the Action Minutes for the June 8, 2020 City Council Meeting.  
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Patti Regehr, addressing Agenda Item Number 29 requested the Council 
remove Agenda Item Number 29 from the Consent Calendar and not approve 
the reduction in members. 
James Hindery, addressing Agenda Item Numbers 21, 22 and 29 requested 
the Council consider allowing 16 and 17-year-olds to vote, adopt ranked 
choice voting, add semi-public campaign financing, and increase the number 
of members of the Human Relations Commission (HRC) and Public Art 
Commission (PAC). 
Jonathan Erman, addressing Agenda Item Number 20 suggested the Council 
review the list of paving projects to ensure the repairs were more than 
cosmetic. 
Lawrence Magid, addressing Agenda Item Number 29 believed reducing the 
number of HRC and PAC members opposed the community's values.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Rohin Ghosh, addressing Agenda Item Number 22 wanted the Council to 
reallocate funding from the Airport Construction Project to salaries for 
essential workers and youth programming. 
Kirsten Flynn, addressing Agenda Item Number 28 opposed the waiver to 
convert the President Hotel.   
Mayor Fine reported the Palo Alto Airport Project was funded with a grant from 
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).   
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member XXX, 
third by Council Member XXX to pull Agenda Item Numbers 20, 25, and 27. 
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND AND THIRD 
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member XXX, 
third by Council Member XXX to pull Agenda Item Number 21. 
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND AND THIRD 
Council Member Kou registered no votes on Agenda Item Numbers 9, 13, 20, 
25, 27, and 29.    
Council Member Tanaka registered no votes on Agenda Item Numbers 11, 24, 
29, and 30A. 
Mayor Fine disclosed he spoke with members of the Homeowners Association 
(HOA) and two individuals regarding Agenda Item Number 25. 
Vice Mayor DuBois disclosed conversations regarding Agenda Item Number 25 
and registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 12. 
Council Member Kniss disclosed a conversation with an individual regarding 
Agenda Item Number 25.   
Council Member Cormack disclosed an attempt to contact an individual 
regarding Agenda Item Number 25. 
Council Member Kou disclosed a conversation with an individual regarding 
Agenda Item Number 25. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to approve 
Agenda Item Numbers 4-30A. 
4. 
Approval of a Contract Extension With AT&T, CALNET3 State Contract 
Number C15157655, Extending the Term Through December 31, 2021, 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
for Telecommunications in an Amount Not-to-Exceed $300,000 
Annually. 
5. 
Approval of Contract Number C20175305A With AECOM in the Amount 
of $302,073 for Consultant Services to Develop a Sea Level Rise 
Vulnerability Assessment and Adaptation Plan. 
6. 
Resolution 9895 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto and Approval of a Joint Powers Authority Agreement and 
Memorandum of Understanding to Join the California State Association 
of Counties Excess Insurance Authority (CSAC-EIA) for Dental/Vision 
Benefit Plan Claims Administration;” and Approval to pay up to 
$130,000 Annually to PBIA for Claims Administration Services and to 
Transfer Funds to PBIA Not-to-Exceed $710,000 for the 2020 Plan Year 
to pay Benefit Claims. 
7. 
Adoption of the Fiscal Year 2021 Investment Policy. 
8. 
Resolution 9896 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Approving the Amended and Restated Market Purchase Program 
Agreement With the Northern California Power Agency (NCPA), 
Authorizing the City Manager or Designee to Authorize NCPA to Purchase 
and Sell Electricity and Related Products Under the Agreement, and 
Approving Revisions to the City’s Energy Risk Management Policy.” 
9. 
Resolution 9897 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto to Approve Amendment Number 2 to the Agreement With the State 
of California for Maintenance of State Highways in the City of Palo Alto 
for Capital Improvement Program Project Charleston/Arastradero 
Corridor Project, PE-13011, and Authorization of the City Manager or 
Designee to Execute the Amendment.” 
10. 
Approval of Eight On-call Consulting Contracts Totaling $1.5 Million Over 
a Four-year Term to Provide Expertise for Long Range Planning Projects, 
Application Processing, and Environmental Review in the Department of 
Planning & Development Services, With all Work Subject to Assigned 
Task Order and Availability of Funds. 
11. 
Approval of Three Five-year Professional Service Agreements for Electric 
Engineering Consulting Services on an As-needed Basis With: 1) AECOM 
Technical Services, Inc, 2) NV5, Inc, and 3) Soudi Consultants, Inc, for 
an Annual Collective Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $1,000,000 per 
Year, and a Five-year Collective Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of 
$5,000,000, With all Work Subject to Assigned Task Orders and 
Availability of Funds. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
12. 
Approval and Authorization for the City Manager to Execute Electric 
Enterprise Fund Contract Number C20177717 With Wire Wrangler, LLC, 
dba TW Power Line Construction, in an Amount of $1,906,408 for the 
Caltrain Facility Relocation Project (EL-17007) and Wood Pole 
Replacement Project (EL-19004); and Authorization to Negotiate and 
Execute Related Change Orders in the Amount of $190,641 for a Total 
Not-to-Exceed Amount of $2,097,049. 
13. 
Approval of six Contracts for On-call Inspection and Plan Review 
Services in a Combined Amount Not-to-Exceed $6,000,000 Over a Four-
year and Six-month Term Ending December 31, 2024 With: 1) 4Leaf, 
Inc, 2) TRB+Associates, 3) SAFEbuilt, 4) Shums Coda Associates, 5) 
Bureau Veritas, and 6) Independent Code Consultants, Inc. 
14. 
Resolution 9898 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Authorizing the City Manager to Apply to the State of California 
Housing and Community Development Department for the Local Early 
Action Planning (LEAP) Grant for Housing Production Grant Program;”  
Environmental Assessment:  Exempt Under the California Environmental 
Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines Section 15061(b)(3). 
15. 
Resolution 9899 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Adopting the 2019 San Francisco Bay Area Integrated Regional 
Water Management Plan.” 
16. 
Approval and Authorization for the City Manager or Designee to Execute 
Amendment Number 3 to the Memorandum of Understanding (Contract 
Number S17167654) With the Santa Clara Valley Water District (dba 
Valley Water) to Increase Funding by $50,000 and Extend the Contract 
Term for an Additional two Years, for a Revised Total Not-to-Exceed 
Amount of $305,000 Over the Five and One-half Year Term to Provide 
Continued Funding and Support Making Water Conservation a way of 
Life Through Water use Efficiency Services, Rebates, and Incentive 
Programs. 
17. 
Approval and Authorization for the City Manager or Designee to Execute 
Contract Number C20171908 With Sedaru in a Total Not-to-Exceed 
Amount of $205,952 to Provide Professional Services for Wastewater 
Collection 
System 
Management 
Software 
and 
Implementation, 
Including $201,452 for Basic Services and up to $4,500 for Additional 
Services. 
18. 
Resolution 9900 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Setting the Appropriations Limit (GANN Limit) for Fiscal Year 2021.” 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
19. 
Approval of Amendment Number 1 to Contract Number C19175498 With 
Integrated Design 360 for Development and Support of Sustainability 
Implementation Plan, Green Building Program, Deconstruction and 
Source Separation Program, Dewatering Monitoring Program, and 
Utilities On-call Services for a Term Extension of One-year and 
Increasing Compensation for Ongoing and Approved Work by $354,230 
for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $930,230. 
20. 
Approval of a Contract With O'Grady Paving, Inc., in an Amount Not-to-
Exceed $2,954,031 for the FY 2020 Streets Resurfacing Project, Capital 
Improvements Program Projects PE-86070, PE-09003, PO-12001, and 
PL-12000. 
21. 
Resolution 9901 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Calling a General Municipal Election for Tuesday, November 3, 
2020, for Four Council Member Seats.” 
22. 
Approval of Contract Number C21178189 With A. Teichert & Son Inc, 
dba Teichert Construction, in the Amount of $13,873,053; Amendment 
Number 8 With C&S Engineers, Inc., Contract Number C15155208A, for 
the Airport Apron Reconstruction Phase III Capital Improvements 
Program Project AP-16000; and Approval of a Budget Amendment in 
Fiscal Year 2021 in the Airport Enterprise Fund. 
23. 
Approval of Seven Five-year Contracts for On-call, as Needed, IT Project 
Support Services for an Annual Collective Total Not-to-Exceed Amount 
of $480,000; and a Five-year Collective Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of 
$2,400,000; and Approval of six On-call, as Needed, SAP Project 
Support Services, for an Annual Collective Total Not-to-Exceed Amount 
of $350,000 per Year, and a Five-year Collective Total Not-to-Exceed 
Amount of $1,750,000, With all Work Subject to Assigned Task Orders 
and Availability of Funds. 
24. 
Approval of an Agreement Between the City of Palo Alto and the 
Midpeninsula 
Community 
Media 
Center, 
Inc, 
for 
Cablecasting, 
Production, and Streaming Services From July 1, 2020 Through June 30, 
2023, for an Annual Amount of $160,000, With two One-year Options 
to Extend for a Potential Five-year Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of 
$800,000. 
25. 
QUASI-JUDICIAL. 1700-1730 Embarcadero Road [20APL-00002 and 
19PLN-00291]: Appeal of Director’s Approval of a Major Architectural 
Review to Address the Following Outstanding Issues for a Previously 
Approved Auto Dealership Project: Color, Landscaping, Parapets, 
Lighting, Transportation Demand Management Plan, County Airport 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Land Use Commission Review; and Floor Area Ratio. Environmental 
Assessment: Addendum to an Initial Study/Mitigated Negative 
Declaration That was Adopted for the Project on June 24, 2019, Zoning 
District: CS(D)(AD). 
26. 
Approval of Three Library Contracts With: 1) Baker & Taylor for up to 
Six-years for a Total Amount Not-to-Exceed $2 Million for the Purchase 
of Library Materials and Services, 2) Ingram for up to Six-years for a 
Total Amount Not-to-Exceed $200,000 for Print Materials and Services, 
and 3) Midwest Tape for up to Six-years for a Total Amount Not-to-
Exceed $700,000 for Media and Digital Materials and Services. 
27. 
Approval of Amendment Number 1 to Contract Number C18170224 With 
Global Action for the Earth (the Empowerment Institute) for $45,000 for 
an Extension of the Community Engagement Block Program (Cool Block) 
and a new Electrification Initiative With the Cool Blocks and Extension 
of the Term to December 2021. 
28. 
Adoption of a Record of Land Use Action (ROLUA) Approving a Change 
to the Local Historic Resources Inventory Classification for 235 Hamilton 
Avenue (Cardinal Hotel) From a Category 3 (Contributing Building) to a 
Category 2 (Major Building) Historic Resource. The Historic Resources 
Board Recommends Adoption of the ROLUA. Approval of This Historic 
Designation is Exempt From the California Environmental Quality Act 
(CEQA) in Accordance With Section 15301 of the CEQA Guidelines. 
29. 
Adoption of an Ordinance to Reduce the Number of Human Relations 
Commission and Public Art Commission Members From Seven to Five. 
30. 
Ordinance 5498 Entitled, Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Dissolving the Library Advisory Commission by Amending Sections 
in Chapters 2.08 (Officers and Departments), 2.16 (Boards and 
Commissions Generally), and 2.24 (Library Advisory Commission)  
(FIRST READING: June 8, 2020 PASSED 7-0).” 
30A. Adoption of a Revised Compensation Plan for Management and 
Professional Employees, Updated Salary Schedules and Side Letters with 
Public Safety Unions. 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 4-8, 10, 14-19, 21-23, 
26, 28, 30:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 9:  6-1 Kou no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 11:  6-1 Tanaka no 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 12:  6-1 DuBois no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 13:  6-1 Kou no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 20:  6-1 Kou no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 24:  6-1 Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 25:  6-1 Kou no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 27:  6-1 Kou no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 29:  5-2 Kou, Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 30A:  6-1 Tanaka no 
Council Member Kou opposed Agenda Item Number 9 because it would add to 
Infrastructure Plan costs.  The positions referenced in Agenda Item Number 
13 required knowledge and experience with fire response protocols and 
procedures.  The projects for the City parking lot, traffic circles, Middlefield 
curb and island in Agenda Item Number 20 needed to be deferred.  She 
preferred to fund the Know Your Neighbor Grant Program rather than the Cool 
Block Program referenced in Agenda Item Number 27.  The number of HRB 
members needed to remain at seven. 
Council Member Tanaka indicated the FAA would not reimburse the $5 million 
cost for Agenda Item Number 11.  Regarding Agenda Item Number 24, he felt 
$800,000 was able to fund several employee positions.  The number of HRC 
and Public Art Commission (PAC) members needed to remain at seven to 
provide some diversity.  The reduction proposed in Agenda Item Number 30A 
was not sufficient. 
Vice Mayor DuBois expressed concern about the lack of detail in the Staff 
Report for Agenda Item Number 12. 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager reported more than 2,000 COVID-19 tests were 
administered at City Hall.  The Library was to offer sidewalk services at Mitchell 
Park Library and Rinconada Library.  Summer camps were to begin July 6, 
2020 with modifications.  The Household Hazardous Waste Station reopened 
on June 20, 2020.  The Summer Streets Program was to begin Friday.  Thirty 
businesses were awarded Small Business Grants.  The City submitted a letter 
opposing the Governor's Budget Proposal to shift Property Taxes away from 
some local governments.  Fireworks were illegal in the City. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding parking enforcement in the 
Residential Preferential Parking Permit (RPP) programs.   
Mr. Shikada advised that parking districts were not being enforced. 
Council Member Tanaka requested comment regarding the proposed closure 
of University Avenue. 
Mr. Shikada indicated Staff spoke via Zoom with some businesses. 
Council took a break at 9:44 P.M. and returned at 10:00 P.M. 
Action Items 
AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 31 AND 32 WERE HEARD AT THE TIME. 
31. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of the Budget Ordinance 5499 Entitled, 
“Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo Alto for Fiscal Year 2021, 
Including Adoption of Operating and Capital Budgets and Municipal Fee 
Schedule;” Adoption of an Ordinance 5501 Entitled “Ordinance of the 
Council of the City of Palo Alto Amending Section 2.04.360 of the Palo 
Alto Municipal Code to Allow Council Members a Salary Waiver Option; 
and Review and Accept the June 30, 2019 Actuarial Valuation of the Palo 
Alto’s Retiree Healthcare Plan and Funding Strategy.” 
32. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of the Following Five Resolutions: 1) 
Resolution 9902 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Approving the Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 Electric Utility Financial Plan, 
Including Proposed Reserve Transfers, and Amending the Electric Utility 
Reserve 
Management 
Practices,” 
2) 
Resolution 
9903 
Entitled, 
“Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Approving the FY 2021 
Gas Utility Financial Plan, Including Proposed Transfers, Amending the 
Gas Utility Reserve Management Practices, and Adopting a Gas Rate 
Increase by Amending Utility Rate Schedules G-1, G-2, G-3 and G-10,” 
Resolution 9904 Entitled, 3) “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Approving the FY 2021 Water Utility Financial Plan and Amending 
the Water Utility Reserve Management Practices,”  Resolution 9905 
Entitled, 4) “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Amending 
Utility Rate Schedule D-1 Increasing the Storm Water Management Fee 
by 2.5 Percent per Month per Equivalent Residential Unit for FY 2021,” 
and Resolution 9906 Entitled, 5) “Resolution of the Council of the City 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
of Palo Alto Amending Utility Rate Schedules EDF-1 and EDF-2 to 
Increase Dark Fiber Rates 2.5 Percent.” 
Kiely Nose, Director of Administrative Services Department and Chief Financial 
Officer reported the Public Health Emergency caused a $39 million General 
Fund deficit.  The Council discussed Budget adjustments during seven 
meetings.  Service impacts remained significant, but essential services would 
continue.  The prior week, Staff reviewed the estimated $20 million impact on 
the Fiscal Year (FY) 2019-2020 Budget.  The revised Proposed Budget of 
$796.7 million was before the Council for approval.  The Capital Improvement 
Program (CIP), salaries and benefits, and utility purchases were the revised 
Proposed Budget's largest areas of expenditure.  The revised Proposed Budget 
included funding for 960 Full-Time Equivalents (FTE), representing a reduction 
of 74 FTE, 62 of which were funded in the General Fund.  Part-time staffing 
was to be reduced by 25.7 FTE.  Staff anticipated staffing reductions were to 
result in the separation of 19 full-time employees and was to affect 70 part-
time employees.  The revised Proposed Budget reflected a 15-percent 
reduction in year-over-year revenues and expenses.  The original Proposed 
Budget published on April 20, 2020 was prepared prior to COVID-19 and did 
not reflect declines in revenues.  Budget adjustments reduced General Fund 
expenses by $41.8 million.  Adjustments since May 26, 2020 included a 10 
percent compensation reduction for Management and Professional employees.  
Remaining items for Council action were a strategy to manage attrition in the 
Police and Fire Departments, funding for KZSU, and a reserve fund for COVID-
19 uncertainties.  The Proposed Budget did not propose a draw on the Budget 
Stabilization Reserve (BSR) Fund, and the BSR balance was to fall within the 
target range but $3.5 million less than the 18.5 percent goal.  FY 2021 utility 
rate changes for gas, fiber and storm drain were to result in an estimated bill 
increase of $1.47 per month.  Also, before the Council for approval were the 
FY 2021 Municipal Fee Schedule, the Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) 
actuarial valuation, an Ordinance allowing Council Members to waive 
compensation, utility rates, and salary schedules and employment/union 
agreements.   
Public Hearing opened 10:30 P.M. 
Fred Balin requested the Council confirm that overnight weekday shifts and all 
weekend shifts were to remain vacant when a firefighter was absent.  He 
questioned the Council wisdom in not backfilling vacant shifts. 
James Hindery found no logic in charging a fee for first responder calls but not 
for police officer calls, in the Flexible Staffing Model for the Fire Department, 
and in eliminating the shuttle. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
1650..532 Katelyn encouraged the Council to accept the offer from the Friends 
of the Palo Alto Children's Theatre and to fund Staff positions. 
Bill Ross expressed concerns that the reduction in fire inspectors did not 
comply with a State mandate and about the impacts of the brownout for the 
Fire Department. 
Rebecca Eisenberg remarked that funding for the Palo Alto Airport construction 
project was to be reallocated to other departments.  She thought Council 
Members should not have other jobs and should be paid a salary. 
Rohin Ghosh commented that funding for the Airport Construction Project 
could be better used for the Shuttle Program or the Re-Entry Program.   
Onaiza was appalled by the reallocation of funding from the Re-Entry Program 
to youth programs.  She disagreed with the Council reducing the number of 
Human Relations Commission (HRC) members when the Council had directed 
the HRC to explore the 8 Can't Wait initiatives.   
AA believed the Budget reductions would affect people with less wealth more 
than people with wealth to spare. 
Pat Burt questioned the reallocation of funding for capital projects and Staff's 
determination of essential projects.   
Jonathan Erman expressed concern that the entry fee for the Junior Museum 
and Zoo would prevent people from visiting it.  The Friends of the Junior 
Museum and Zoo was in a better position to raise funds for expenses. 
Stephen Koo suggested police officers with disciplinary records be discharged 
rather than senior police officers being encouraged to retire.  Overtime pay 
for police officers appearing in court needed to be the minimum allowed rate.   
Brent White, Local 1319 President indicated his team would offer suggestions 
for creative ways to reduce expenses while keeping the community safe.   
Audrey Knox was disappointed with the Council's response to comments from 
Vote 16 Palo Alto.  She offered points for the City to negotiate with the police 
officers' union next year. 
Xander Koo was not able to believe the Council had proposed funding 
reductions for the Police and Fire Departments during a pandemic. 
Jeremy Erman suggested the Council reallocate funding for the refurbishment 
of seating at the Lucie Stern Community Center to the Palo Alto Children's 
Theatre. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Public Hearing closed at 11:04 P.M. 
MOTION: Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth 
to move Agenda Item Number 33 to the June 23, 2020 Action Agenda. 
MOTION PASSED:  5-2 Cormack, Fine no 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted the Council reduced expenses and revenues for all 
departments.  The Council did not consider Staff reductions lightly.  The 
Council attempted to balance reductions across all departments.  Labor 
concessions did not meet the Council's expectations.  He inquired whether a 
fee for a Resident's First Parking Permit would be charged in FY 2021.   
Ms. Nose explained that the Municipal Fee Schedule would reflect a fee for the 
first permit, but the Council had to approve the Residential Preferential Parking 
Permit (RPP) program, which included the date a fee could begin. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if funding for the Think Fund remained in place. 
Ms. Nose replied yes. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested Staff comment on the letter from Friends of the 
Palo Alto Children's Theatre. 
Kristen O’Kane, Director of Community Services related that the Friends of the 
Palo Alto Children's Theatre offered $90,000 for programming and $150,000 
for other costs and requested the Council restore 2.5 FTEs.  The funding was 
able to be utilized for virtual programming and planning for spring 
productions.  The cost of the 2.5 FTEs was approximately $180,000-$190,000. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested Staff's recommendation. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager noted the City did not have funds for the requested 
FTEs. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated the labor unions' willingness to 
negotiate with the City.  She asked Staff to relate the reduction in 
Professional/Management 
employees’ 
compensation 
with 
the 
Service 
Employees' International Union (SEIU) changes. 
Ms. Nose explained the original proposal for management concessions 
included a 26-day furlough, which meant managers were not to work one day 
out of every two weeks.  Without agreement from SEIU, Staff believed 
implementing the furlough was impractical and infeasible.  The furlough was 
changed to 13 days. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Council Member Cormack requested the number of Police Officers and 
Firefighters who would leave City employment in July 2020. 
Ms. Nose advised that the City would not initiate employment separation for 
any Police Officers and Firefighters in July 2020. 
Council Member Cormack noted the Council had reserved some funds and 
would determine use of those funds in the future.  She thanked employees 
who were to separate from the City for their service and wished them well. 
Council Member Kou asked if the City funded Palo Alto Community Child Care 
(PACCC). 
Ms. O’Kane explained that the City provided funding to PACCC, which PACCC 
used to subsidize families' childcare.  Previously, the City leased space at Palo 
Alto Unified School District (PAUSD) school sites and subleased the spaces to 
PACCC. 
Mr. Shikada added that City support and funding for PACCC was not going to 
change. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether $6 million in addition to $5 million was 
transferred to the Infrastructure Fund. 
Ms. Nose clarified that the transfer from the General Fund to the Infrastructure 
Fund in FY 2021 was $5 million.  The $6 million amount pertained to reductions 
in the FY 2020 transfers to the Infrastructure Fund. 
Council Member Kou noted in prior years vacant positions in the Fire 
Department were not filled. 
Ms. Nose clarified that the vacant positions had been associated with the City's 
negotiations with Stanford University.  Based upon the number of voluntary 
separations and retirements that occurred in the first half of the fiscal year, 
the Fire Department was able to see personnel reductions.  In the Proposed 
Budget, vacant positions were not to be backfilled with overtime. 
Council Member Tanaka requested an explanation of funding for the CIP. 
Ms. Nose explained that Staff had originally recommended a 50 percent or $7 
million reduction in the base transfer to the CIP.  The Council had directed 
Staff to attempt to reduce the transfer by another $2.6 million.  Staff now 
recommended a 60 percent or $10 million reduction in the base transfer.  A 
separate transfer to the CIP represented Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) 
funding.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Council Member Tanaka requested Staff address community concerns 
regarding the proposed brownout for the Fire Department. 
Geo Blackshire, Fire Chief reported a maximum of three vacancies on evening 
and weekend shifts were not to be backfilled with overtime.  If one person 
was absent from a station, only the ambulance at the station was to be staffed.  
If two people were absent from a station, the third person was to be 
reassigned, and the station was to be vacant.  When a crew was out of service, 
the response time for the area was to increase.  The increase in the response 
time was not able to be estimated.  With Council approval of using attrition to 
reduce staffing, brownouts were less likely to occur.   
Council Member Kniss inquired about the last time City staffing fell below 
1,000. 
Ms. Nose indicated it had occurred prior to 2000. 
Council Member Kniss asked if the Human Resources (HR) Department would 
provide assistance to separated employees. 
Rumi Portillo, Director of Human Resources advised that a virtual resource 
center was to be available and provide information regarding Unemployment 
and Health Insurance coverage.  HR Staff was available for in-person meetings 
as well.   
Council Member Kniss asked if the Council could allocate funds from the 
COVID-19 Reserve Fund. 
Ms. Nose replied yes. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to 
fund KZSU at $20,000 for Fiscal Year 2021. 
Council Member Cormack asked if KZSU was broadcasting the Council's virtual 
meetings. 
Mr. Shikada answered yes. 
Mayor Fine supported KZSU but was hesitant to utilize the COVID-19 Reserve 
before September. 
MOTION FAILED:  3-4 Cormack, Filseth, Fine, Tanaka no 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted a decrease in the cost of the Airport Paving Project, 
which indicated the Capital Budget was inflated.  Project costs needed to be 
monitored as projects were bid.  Cities across the country were adding 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
personnel to police departments to handle nonviolent calls.  He inquired 
whether the Council was able to approve the Proposed Budget with funding 
placeholders for reform positions in the Police Department.   
Mr. Shikada related that a series of follow-up actions included Staff looking at 
methods of service delivery and functions with other public safety models.   
Vice Mayor DuBois clarified his question as to whether the Council should 
consider placeholder funding now or in September 2020. 
Mr. Shikada suggested the Council wait.  Staff continued to monitor expenses 
and was to have additional information for the Council at a future meeting. 
Council Member Tanaka preferred to delay construction of the Public Safety 
Building (PSB) and other capital projects in order to fund programs that were 
important to the community.  He commented on the size of the City Manager's 
Office, employee raises and salaries, rebidding capital projects, marketing 
employees and recruiters, cuts to Community Services programs, utility rates, 
and Entry Fees for the Junior Museum and Zoo.   
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to:  
A. 
Adopt the Fiscal Year 2021 Budget Ordinance, which includes:  
i. 
City Manager’s Fiscal Year 2021 Proposed Operating and Capital 
Budgets, previously distributed at the April 20th City Council 
Meeting;  
ii. 
Amendments to the City Manager’s Fiscal Year 2021 Proposed 
Operating Budget; 
iii. 
Amendments to the City Manager’s Fiscal Year 2021 Proposed 
Capital Budget; 
iv. 
Allocated Charge Amendments to the City Manager’s Fiscal Year 
2021 Proposed Operating and Capital Budgets;  
v. 
Fiscal Year 2021 City Table of Organization; and 
vi. 
Fiscal Year 2021 Municipal Fee Changes;  
B. 
Adopt the Ordinance Amending Section 2.04.360 of the Palo Alto 
Municipal Code to Allow Council Members a Salary Waiver Option. A 
regular majority vote is required to approve this ordinance which 
becomes effective 30 days after the second reading and final adoption; 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
C. 
Accept the Fiscal Year 2021 – 2025 Capital Improvement Plan; 
D. 
As recommended by the Finance Committee at the May 5, 2020 meeting 
(CMR 11284), accept the June 30, 2019 biennial actuarial valuation of 
Palo Alto’s Retiree Healthcare Plan and approve full funding of the 
Actuarial Determined Calculation (ADC) for Fiscal Year 2021 and Fiscal 
Year 2022 using a 6.25% Discount Rate for the calculation. 
E. 
Approve and adopt Resolutions of the City Council of the City of Palo 
Alto:  
i. 
Approving the FY 2021 Electric Utility Financial Plan, including 
reserve transfers, and amending the Electric Utility Reserve 
Management Practices;  
ii. 
Approving the FY 2021 Gas Utility Financial Plan, including reserve 
transfers, amending the Gas Utility Reserve Management 
Practices, and adopting a Gas Rate Increase by Amending Utility 
Rate Schedules G-1, G-2, G-3 and G-10;  
iii. 
Approving the FY 2021 Water Utility Financial Plan, including 
reserve transfers, and amending the water Utility Reserve 
Management Practices;  
iv. 
Amending Utility Rate Schedule D-1 increasing the Storm Water 
Management Fee by 2.5 percent per month per Equivalent 
Residential Unit for FY 2021 (Attachments K & L); and  
v. 
Amending Utility Rate Schedules EDF-1 and EDF-2 to increase 
Dark Fiber Rates 2.5 percent. 
Council Member Filseth noted the difficulty of cutting the Budget, but the 
reductions were necessary and prudent given the uncertain economic outlook.   
Mayor Fine believed the Council had balanced community interests. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the Motion be split. 
Council Member Kou thanked the Budget Office for the many hours of 
preparing and revising the Budget.  Funds for capital projects could be 
redirected to Public Safety and the Community Services Department.   
Council Member Kniss suggested the Council could have funded the Staff 
positions if they had worked a little longer.  Hopefully, the outlook was going 
to be better in August or September. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING 
MOTION PART A PASSED:  5-2 Kou, Tanaka no 
MOTION PART B PASSED:  7-0  
MOTION PART C PASSED:  5-2 Kou, Tanaka no 
MOTION PART D PASSED:  7-0 
MOTION PART E PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
Vice Mayor DuBois left the meeting at 12:07 A.M. 
Council Member Kniss requested the date funding for KZSU would cease. 
Ms. Nose  indicated July 1. 
33. 
PUBLIC HEARING / QUASI-JUDICIAL. 488 University Avenue [19PLN-
00038]:  Request for a Waiver From Title 18 to Allow Conversion of a 
Residential use to a Hotel use to Accommodate 100 Guestrooms. In 
Addition, the Applicant Requests Approval of an Architectural Review 
and Historic Review Application for Interior and Exterior Renovations to 
the Hotel President to This Category 2 Historic Building, as Well as a 
Parking Adjustment to Accommodate the Conversion to a Hotel use. The 
Project Also Includes a Conditional Use Permit to Allow for Restoration 
and use of a Historic Rooftop Garden and for the On-site Sale of Alcoholic 
Beverages. Proposed Revisions Include Structural and Seismic Retrofit 
of the Existing Structure. Zone District: Downtown Commercial District 
With 
Ground 
Floor 
and 
Pedestrian 
Overlays 
(CD-C)(GF)(P). 
Environmental Assessment: Exempt From the Provisions of the 
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Pursuant to  Guidelines 
Sections 15332 (In-fill Development), 15331 (Historical Resource 
Restoration/Rehabilitation), 15301 (Existing Facilities), and 15302 
(Replacement or Reconstruction). (THIS ITEM IS CONTINUED TO JUNE 
23, 2020). 
34. 
Approval of Special Amendments to the Employment Agreements 
between the City of Palo Alto and Council Appointed Officers Specifically 
the City Attorney and the City Manager. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager noted an At-Places Memo concerning a correction 
was provided. 
Rebecca Eisenberg felt the compensation packages for City executives did not 
align with compensation in the private sector and were higher than most 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 28 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
household incomes.  The proposal was actually a 5 percent decrease in 
compensation and a 10 percent decrease in hours worked.   
James Hindery concurred with Ms. Eisenberg's comments.   
Jeremy Erman was disappointed that upper management did not follow 
through with their compensation reduction. 
Jonathan Erman stated a professional would have accomplished the task. 
Xander Koo remarked that there should be more substantial reductions.   
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth 
to approve and authorize the Mayor to execute the following contract 
amendments for Council Appointed Officers:  
A. 
Amendment Number Eight to employment agreement between the City 
of Palo Alto and Molly S. Stump; and 
B. 
Amendment Number Two to employment agreement between the City 
of Palo Alto and Ed Shikada. 
Council Member Kniss advised that compensation for City Staff was 
competitive in the Bay Area. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed with public comment regarding the amount of 
compensation.  The Council needed to institute "pay for performance" metrics.  
The alleged compensation reduction was suspect.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether Staff could accrue paid leave. 
Kiely Nose, Director of Administrative Services Department and Chief Financial 
Officer, replied yes. 
MOTION PASSED:  5-1 Tanaka no, DuBois absent 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack recommended Council Members think about Council 
policies and protocols for virtual meetings and was troubled by Council 
Members turning off their video feeds during the meeting. 
Mayor Fine explained the need for the list of public speakers and requested 
Council Members assist him as needed. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 29 of 29 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/22/2020 
Council Member Kniss suggested the Council consider protocols for public 
speakers. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed the City Clerk display the video of public 
speakers in order to improve the Council's engagement with the community. 
Mayor Fine noted the possibility of inappropriate messages being displayed 
during public comment.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager acknowledged the efforts of the City Clerk to 
facilitate public speakers and the difficult work of the Council in adjusting the 
Budget.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 12:33 A.M. 
