CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 11 
Regular Meeting 
March 16, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers at 6:02 P.M. 
Present:  
Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka Participating 
Remotely 
Absent: 
 
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY-EXISTING LITIGATION 
Santa Clara County Superior Court, Case No. 16CV300760 
(One Case, as Defendant) –Miriam Green v. City of Palo Alto 
Authority: Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(1). 
2. 
THIS ITEM HAS BEEN MOVED TO THE END OF THE AGENDA 
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois 
to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 6:03 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:55 P.M. 
Mayor Fine announced no reportable action. 
Rail Communications Update 
3. 
Connecting Palo Alto Rail Grade Separation: Receive an Update from 
the Expanded Community Advisory Panel (XCAP). 
NO DISCUSSION THIS EVENING-INFORMATION REPORT ONLY  
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor Fine announced Agenda Item Number 2 was moved to the end of the 
Agenda and Agenda Item Number 8 was continued to the March 23, 2020 
Council meeting.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 11 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/16/2020 
Oral Communications 
None. 
Minutes Approval 
4. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the February 24 and March 2, 2020 
Council Meetings. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to approve the Action Minutes for the February 24 and March 2, 2020 
Council Meetings. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss, to approve Agenda Item Numbers 5-6. 
5. 
Authorize Transmittal of the 2019 Comprehensive Plan Annual 
Progress Report to the Office of Planning and Research, and the 2019 
Housing Element Annual Progress Report to the Department of 
Housing and Community Development. 
6. 
Ordinance 5491 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Amending Chapter 1.12 (Administrative Penalties – Citations) to 
Provide for an Administrative Hearing Upon Partial Advance Deposit of 
$250 and Clarify Existing Procedures for Hearings (FIRST READING: 
March 2, 2020      PASSED:  6-0 Kou absent).” 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
City Manager Comments 
None. 
Action Items 
6A. 
Update Regarding City Responses to COVID-19, Including Community 
Education and City Service Changes; Ratification of Proclamation of 
Local Emergency. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager reported Staff was coordinating activities with 
numerous agencies.  Information for the public was increased.  The number 
of Coronavirus cases was increasing rapidly, and the County of Santa Clara 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 11 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/16/2020 
(County) Public Health Department has taken significant action.  City 
facilities were closed.  Residents in the six-county Bay Area had been 
ordered to shelter in place as of midnight March 16, 2020.  Staff for 
essential services were to report to work while Staff for nonessential services 
were to work remotely.  Priorities were to maintain the ability to respond to 
emergencies, make the community aware of guidance and resources, 
address the highest-priority community needs and adopt routine business.  
The Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and the Citizen Corps Council 
(CCC) had been activated.  Staff was participating in County Public Health 
Department briefings and tracking Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) advisories. 
Ken Dueker, Chief of the Office of Emergency Services advised that the 
situation was evolving, and the City was following the lead of the County 
Public Health Department.  The CCC was intended to gather stakeholders to 
respond to and discuss recovery from a community crisis.  The CCC 
contacted senior and skilled nursing facilities and faith communities.   
Mr. Shikada noted Staff was establishing a community support call center, 
and it was expected to be active by March 18, 2020.  The County had 
delegated food distribution to the City of San Jose.  The City of San Jose was 
relying on individual cities to identify persons who might need food.  The 
community support call center was  important because residents were able 
to communicate needs to access the food distribution and other programs, 
and to obtain information.  Staff was planning strategically for a multi-month 
effort and responding to almost hourly changes.  The CCC provided a regular 
and immediate pipeline for information and communication among key 
community partners.  City messaging urged the community to remain calm 
and check on neighbors.  The City website was a core component of 
communications for citizens and was able to be enhanced to provide 
information for businesses.   
Mayor Fine needed the citizens to remain calm, disciplined and composed.  
In addition, citizens needed to follow County, State and Federal guidelines.  
He asked citizens to remain home, practice increased personal hygiene, help 
neighbors and check on elderly and ill individuals.  Those who felt ill needed 
to call their doctors' offices.  Deliveries and postal service was going to 
continue.  While the shelter in place order was in effect, residents were able 
to go out for recreational purposes but had to practice social distancing.  
Staff was activating necessary plans and protocols.  He encouraged residents 
to 
utilize 
established 
communication 
channels, 
such 
as 
cityofpaloalto.org/coronavirus, sccgov.org/sites/phd, and cdc.gov.  He was 
considering an emergency Ad Hoc Committee to augment Staff.  Staff was to 
contact community-based organizations and faith communities as needed.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 11 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/16/2020 
The City of San Jose Food Distribution Program was focusing on seniors, but 
they hoped to expand the demographic with time.  He was working with the 
City Manager and other officials for local business support.  The Council's 
role in the crisis was to support the professionals.  He asked Council 
Members to serve as liaisons in specific focus areas in an effort to support 
City Staff.   
Vice Mayor DuBois remarked that it was time to ratify the Proclamation of 
Local Emergency.  Mr. Dueker was to lead the City's response to the 
pandemic.  He inquired about informing the public of new dates for cancelled 
meetings. 
Mr. Shikada related that Staff was preparing a list of events that would be 
cancelled through April 30, 2020. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if City Staff that were working remotely would 
continue to do so. 
Mr. Shikada replied yes, to the extent possible.   
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about isolation for critical Staff. 
Mr. Dueker reported public safety personnel who were involved in training 
and planning were working remotely.  Contingency plans included the 
possibility of 40 percent or more absenteeism. 
Mr. Shikada added that Staff was minimizing internal interactions and 
working with assigned equipment and vehicles.   
Vice Mayor DuBois encouraged Staff to utilize volunteers as appropriate and 
when appropriate.  If the State did not act, the City needed to be prepared 
to ensure residents that lost their jobs due to the Coronavirus were not 
evicted, which included small businesses. 
Mr. Shikada advised that the State Legislature and the Governor were 
addressing that type of relief, and Staff was going to monitor their actions. 
Vice Mayor DuBois preferred the Council continue to meet and transact 
business.  Council Committees were able to meet if Staff was available to 
support the Committees.  Hopefully, the public was able to participate in 
future Council meetings, by means of technology. 
Council Member Cormack believed the City's primary responsibility was 
health and safety, but finances and economics were also important topics in 
the near future.  She requested Staff comment on continued operation of the 
Utilities Department. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 11 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/16/2020 
Mr. Shikada indicated electricity, water and gas were essential services 
provided by the City.  The Staffing Plan reflected the nature and importance 
of continuing utility services. 
Council Member Cormack commended Staff for the public communications.  
She hoped communications could become two-way.  She encouraged 
residents to check on one another via text, email and by phone.  Responses 
to the crisis and City actions varied widely.  Public comment via email was 
just as valid as public comment in person.  She inquired whether the Council 
could assist Staff. 
Mr. Shikada commented that serving as ambassadors and the voice of the 
City for the community was extremely important. 
Council Member Kniss asked if Mr. Dueker had been forewarned about the 
shelter in place order. 
Mr. Dueker responded no, but the order was anticipated. 
Council Member Kniss asked if Mr. Dueker was responsible for activating the 
CCC. 
Mr. Dueker indicated the City Manager and he decided to activate it.   
Council Member Kniss inquired about preparation of Frequently Asked 
Questions (FAQ). 
Council Member Cormack related that the Chief Communications Officer 
prepared FAQs. 
Council Member Kniss shared questions from the community about allowed 
activities. 
Mr. Dueker was going to add information based on the questions to the 
website.  Public safety resources were not going to be expended to ensure 
residents remained in their homes.  The Shelter in Place order allowed 
residents to visit shops, medical offices and outdoor spaces.  Seniors were 
not quarantined.   
Council Member Kniss requested the FAQs include the difference between a 
quarantine and a lock down. 
Council Member Kou noted the Office of Emergency Services (OES) had a 
Staff of two.  She requested Staff create a website with information for small 
businesses.  A small business owner had reported the Small Business 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 11 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/16/2020 
Administration (SBA) was offering short-term loans with a 9 percent interest 
rate.  She inquired about State laws regarding price gouging.   
Council Member Filseth believed the County had issued a directive regarding 
price gouging.   
Council Member Kou understood Staff was speaking with the State about 
helping small businesses with taxes and wage payments.  She inquired 
about assistance for City employees who were not working.  She requested 
the responsibilities of the State, County, City and private sector, the 
priorities for essential services, services available for the homeless 
population, communication channels for Recreational Vehicle (RV) dwellers, 
information regarding Palo Alto Unified School District's (PAUSD) ability to 
serve disabled students and distribution of the standard operating procedure 
(SOP) for a pandemic to Block Preparedness Coordinators (BPC).  Perhaps 
Staff was able to explore a Resolution that encouraged commercial and 
residential lenders and public utilities to enact a 60 or 90 day moratorium on 
default payments.   
Council Member Filseth noted the difficulties of updating, summarizing and 
distributing the large amounts of information.  He requested to know the 
responsibility of the CCC. 
Mr. Dueker reported the CCC was an advisory body, and its formal title was 
the Palo Alto/Stanford Citizen Corps Council.   
Council Member Filseth asked if the CCC could decide on individual testing 
for the Coronavirus. 
Mr. Dueker explained that the CCC is not an information clearinghouse.  
Typically, the CCC educated the community and shared information.   
Mayor Fine stated the CCC conference call had addressed store closings and 
concerns about traffic. 
Council Member Filseth asked about the CCC sharing its information with the 
community. 
Mr. Dueker added that the CCC had addressed childcare for medical workers.  
The Community Support Call Center was a means to distribute information 
about store closings and limited hours. 
Council Member Kou clarified that the CCC had shared information regarding 
medical personnel, childcare for medical personnel and details about 
security. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 11 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/16/2020 
Council Member Tanaka agreed with Council Member Cormack regarding 
public health and safety.  He was working with Staff to facilitate remote 
participation during Council meetings.  The Council needed to prioritize the 
City's expenses and time.  The economic impacts of the pandemic were 
anticipated to be far-reaching.   
Mr. Shikada reported the economic impacts were going to be severe.  Hotel 
occupancy decreased significantly, which affected Transient Occupancy Tax 
(TOT) revenues; the City implemented a hiring freeze.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if the City Manager had an estimate of the 
decrease in City revenues.   
Mr. Shikada answered no, it was too early for projections. 
Council Member Tanaka asked Staff to determine the length of time the 
Budget Stabilization Reserve (BSR) Fund could fund the current level of City 
services.  He thought the Council may want to consider a bond offering to fill 
the gap.  Expenses awaiting Council approval and a Business Tax may need 
to be reconsidered. 
Mayor Fine requested Council Members filter community suggestions for 
Staff and share information.  He inquired about additional resources for the 
emergency response. 
Mr. Dueker expressed concern about unknown and unimaginable incidents.   
Robert Jonsen, Police Chief advised that the Police Department was prepared 
to respond to the pandemic; however, the physical toll on employees was 
unknown. 
Geo Blackshire, Fire Chief reported Fire personnel had transported patients 
with 
Coronavirus 
symptoms, 
but 
personnel 
had 
utilized 
protective 
equipment.  Plans were in place to address a low stock of protective 
equipment.   
Council Member Kniss asked if Chief Blackshire was in contact with area fire 
departments and offering assistance when needed. 
Mr. Blackshire replied yes.   
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss, to ratify 
the Proclamation issued by the Director of Emergency Services (City 
Manager) of Local Emergency on March 12, 2020 due to the presence and 
community spread of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) in Santa Clara County. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 11 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/16/2020 
Mayor Fine noted the Proclamation expired after 60 days and assumed the 
Council could ratify an extension or a second Proclamation. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Mayor Fine indicated an emergency meeting of the Council could be 
scheduled if needed.   
7. 
Adoption of two Ordinances Amending Various Sections of Chapter 
2.08 (Officers and Departments), Chapter 2.30 (Contracts and 
Purchasing Procedures); Chapter 10.50 (Residential Preferential 
Parking Districts), Chapter 10.51 (Crescent Park no Overnight Parking 
Program); and Title 18 (Zoning) to Reflect Updates to the Organization 
of Some City Departments and Duties; Clean Up the City’s Purchasing 
Procedures; add a New Exemption From Competitive Solicitation for 
Some Types of Personnel-related Services Contracts; and Update 
Enforcement and Hearing Procedures in the Zoning Code. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney reported the proposed amendments were 
primarily administrative and implemented the Council's changes to the City's 
organizational structure.  Under the proposed amendments, the Office of 
Transportation was created; the Department of Development Services and 
the Department of Planning and Community Environment were merged into 
the Department of Planning and Development Services; department 
descriptions were updated; and an exemption from competitive solicitation 
was added.  The Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) reviewed 
and recommended the Council approve the proposed amendments to the 
Zoning Code.   
Vice Mayor DuBois recalled previous Council discussion that their focus was 
not 100 percent cost recovery.  The appeal and Hearing Fee had increased 
from $280 in 2016 to $595 in 2020, but the increase did not seem to keep 
up with inflation.   
Council Member Cormack asked if all the professional service contracts listed 
in Section T would be subject to competitive solicitation.   
Ms. Stump advised that the competitive process depended on the size of the 
contract.  The City's procurement program did not require competitive 
solicitation for small contracts, it required an informal process for medium 
contracts and competitive solicitation for large contracts.  The Municipal 
Code did not contain exemptions for contracts. 
Council Member Cormack asked if over the past year large contracts had 
been subject to competitive solicitation. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 11 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/16/2020 
Rumi Portillo, Director of Human Resources explained that an immediate 
need for a Workplace Safety Consulting Service, or a recruitment service 
resulted in the use of the Sole Source Process.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether many of the professional services 
contracts involved specialized expertise. 
Ms. Portillo answered yes.   
Council Member Tanaka felt recruitment services should be a competitive 
bid.   
Ms. Portillo advised that the City utilized recruitment firms familiar with the 
government sector.  For a number of years, there had been a shortage of 
knowledgeable and experienced recruiters.  A lengthy contract process 
deterred the best firms from working with the City.  Many times, the City 
was in urgent circumstances to begin recruitments.  The City competed for 
recruitment services with cities that did not have lengthy contract processes. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if recruitment would be competitive in light of 
the current economy. 
Ms. Portillo clarified that specialized recruiters were needed to handle 
recruitments for management and utility positions. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager added that a majority of recruitments were 
handled by City Staff.  The Code Amendment needed to apply to a range of 
economic cycles. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to: 
A. 
Adopt the proposed ordinance to update various sections of Chapter 
2.08 (Officers and Departments), Chapter 2.30 (Contracts and 
Purchasing Procedures), Chapter 10.50 (Residential Preferential 
Parking Districts), and Chapter 10.51 (Crescent Park No Overnight 
Parking Program) to reflect updates to the organization of some City 
departments and duties, clean up the City’s purchasing procedures, 
and add a new exemption from competitive solicitation for some types 
of personnel-related professional services contracts; and 
B. 
Adopt the proposed ordinance to update five sections of Title 18 
(Zoning) related to enforcement, hearing procedures, and to reflect 
the new name of the Planning and Development Services Department. 
The Planning and Transportation Commission recommends that the 
City Council adopt this ordinance. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 11 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/16/2020 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
8. 
Acceptance of the GreenWaste of Palo Alto Environmental Report; 
Authorization to Negotiate and Execute an Amendment to GreenWaste 
Contract Number C09124501 to Increase Compensation by up to 
$950,000 to Process Mixed Paper Within the United States; and 
Approval of a Budget Amendment in the Refuse Fund (ITEM 
CONTINUED TO MARCH 23, 2020). 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Kniss asked if there was a Study Session scheduled the 
following week. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager replied yes. 
Mayor Fine indicated the Vice Mayor, City Manager and he would reevaluate 
Agendas for the next few weeks.   
Council Member Kniss asked if the Council should reconsider a Business Tax 
prior to the Study Session. 
Mr. Shikada was going to consult with the Mayor. 
Council Member Kniss asked if the March, 2020 meetings would be needed. 
Mr. Shikada suggested many Agenda Items could be postponed, but Staff 
was working on facilities to allow public engagement in Council meetings. 
Council Member Kniss asked if Council Members should plan for Council 
meetings to be held. 
Mayor Fine answered yes.   
Council Member Kou reported Supervisor Simitian held productive meetings 
about Safe Parking the prior week in Palo Alto.   
Council Member Tanaka indicated Council Member Kniss and he attended the 
National League of Cities conference in Washington, D.C., and learned about 
a Pilot Program regarding Airplane Noise could be implemented at San 
Francisco International Airport (SFO). 
Closed Session 
2. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY-POTENTIAL LITIGATION 
Subject: Threatened Litigation Over February 4, 2019  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 11 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/16/2020 
Conditional Approvals and Denials of Crown Castle Cluster 2  
[17PLN-00433] Small Cell Nodes 
Authority: Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(2)  
One Potential Case, as Defendant. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to go 
into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 8:30 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 9:08 P.M. 
Mayor Fine announced no reportable action. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 9:08 P.M. 
