CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 26 
Special Meeting 
August 17, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in Virtual 
Teleconference at 5:02 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Closed Session 
1. 
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE APPOINTMENT 
Title: City Auditor  
Authority: Government Code Section 54957 (b) 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to go into 
Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:05 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 7:28 P.M. 
Mayor Fine announced no reportable action. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor Fine advised that Agenda Item Number 4 was continued. 
Oral Communications 
Jonathan Littke asked the Council to approve and proceed with Fiber to the 
Premises (FTTP). 
Matt Barthelemy also supported FTTP. 
Rebecca Eisenberg believed the Council was obligated to share firms' bids for 
the position of City Auditor.  Hiring a firm to replace an individual was not cost 
savings and did not benefit the community.   
Joe Rimsa supported FTTP in light of working and schooling from home.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois indicated the public could send emails to the Council to 
share thoughts, petitions or survey results. 
Minutes Approval 
1. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the August 03, 2020 City Council Meeting.  
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
approve the Action Minutes for the August 03, 2020 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack 
to approve Agenda Item Number 2. 
2. 
Resolution 9912 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Amending Utility Rate Schedule E-15 (Electric Service Connection 
Charges), and Utilities Rules and Regulations 2, 15, 20, 27 and 29.” 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager announced a heat advisory and a red flag warning 
were in effect and the potential for Statewide rotating power outages would 
continue throughout the week.  Utilities customers were cooperating with the 
Utilities Department's request for voluntary load reductions.  A cooling center 
was going to be open on August 18, 2020 at Mitchell Park Community Center.  
COVID-19 cases seemed to be stabilizing but at a very high number.  More 
than 600 people were tested for COVID-19 at the Palo Alto testing site on 
August 14, 2020.  The testing site was available on September 11 and 25, 
2020.  The Council received race and equity updates on August 24, 2020.  The 
prior week, the Human Relations Commission (HRC) held a listening session 
regarding racism.  The Palo Alto Library was going to hold a virtual 
conversation with "Color of Law" authority Richard Rothstein on August 27, 
2020.  The removal of blue United States Postal Service (USPS) postal boxes 
was delayed.  Congresswoman Eshoo was going to host a press conference 
regarding the USPS on August 18, 2020.  The Enjoy! catalog was offering in-
person, online and modified recreation classes during the fall.  A virtual Town 
Hall regarding rail grade separation was going to launch on August 19, 2020.   
Council Member Kniss was disappointed by the fact that only two COVID-19 
testing sites were open on weekends when the message to the public was "get 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
tested."  The County of Santa Clara (County) did not seem to coordinate 
everything. 
Mr. Shikada noted the County was attempting to include private healthcare 
providers in testing efforts. 
Council Member Cormack seemed to recall the pop-up testing site was to be 
open on August 28, 2020 as well. 
Mr. Shikada advised that it would be open on August 28, 2020. 
Council Member Cormack reported the County was targeting testing in the 
areas with the largest outbreaks.  She inquired about the total number of 
power outages in the City since Thursday. 
Dean Batchelor, Utilities Director stated the City had suffered two outages, 
one Friday evening and one Saturday morning.   
Council Member Tanaka emphasized the need for Fiber to the Premises (FTTP) 
with everyone utilizing the internet at home. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney advised that a future Agenda Item would be the 
appropriate time to discuss FTTP. 
Action Items 
2A.  PUBLIC 
HEARING 
/ 
QUASI-JUDICIAL. 
2353 
Webster 
Street 
[18PLN00339]: Appeal of Director’s Approval of an Individual Review 
Application to Demolish an Existing One-story 1,593 Square Foot (SF) 
Home and Construct a Two-story Home (Approximately 2,935 SF) With 
a Basement and an Attached Garage. Zoning District: Single-family 
Residential (R-1) (Continued From August 10, 2020). 
Jodie Gerhardt, Current Planning Manager reported the application proposed 
a 2,935 square-foot single-family home with a 1,621 square-foot basement.  
An oak tree, 72 inches in diameter, was located in the rear yard.  Staff's 
approval was issued December 5, 2019.  A timely request for the hearing was 
filed on December 19, 2019.  A Director's Hearing was held on February 27, 
2020, at which time the Director approved the application with additional 
conditions of approval.  A timely appeal was filed on March 31, 2020.  Key 
considerations were Individual Review (IR) Guidelines, oak tree protections 
and basement dewatering.  A 60 foot Tree Protection Zone (TPZ) covered a 
fair amount of buildable area.  The new home was proposed as close to the 
front setback as possible and about 40 feet from the tree.  The Director 
included conditions of approval to protect the tree during demolition of the 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
existing home.  Construction of the new home was likely going to damage 17 
percent of the critical root zone, which was well below the definition of tree 
removal.  New standards for dewatering applied to the project.  Preliminary 
reports indicated groundwater was found 9 feet below the surface in one 
location.  Staff recommended the use of wood lagging for shoring during 
dewatering to protect the tree.  The Director found the project complied with 
the Municipal Code and IR Design Guidelines 1-5 and added conditions of 
approval for tree protection.   
Council Member Cormack disclosed that she had responded to a phone call 
from an appellant and declined to visit a site other than the project site.   
Vice Mayor DuBois disclosed that he met with the appellants to view secant 
walls at a nearby property and the tree in question.  The appellants supplied 
him with written information, which they had also provided to the Council.  Mr. 
Bennett informed him that a renowned arborist had stated a valley oak relied 
upon groundwater rather than surface water.   
Council Member Filseth disclosed that he had visited the site with Mr. Morton, 
spoken with the architect, and viewed the excavation at a nearby property. 
Mayor Fine disclosed that he had received a number of phone calls from Mr. 
Morton several months ago as well as an additional phone call last week, at 
which time he declined to discuss the matter. 
Council Member Kniss talked briefly with Mr. Morton and visited the site. 
Council Member Kou drove by the property, spoke with Mr. Morton and met 
him at the site to view the tree and secant walls at a nearby property. 
Council Member Tanaka disclosed a phone conversation with Mr. Morton, a 
visit to the site, and two occasions when this was the topic of his office hours.  
Recordings of his office hours were available on his YouTube channel. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney requested Council Member Tanaka indicate 
whether he had received any material or evidence that might influence his 
thinking during those contacts.   
Council Member Tanaka indicated information discussed during his office 
hours was also contained in the Staff Report.   
Public Hearing opened at 8:08 P.M. 
Jack Morton, Appellant emphasized that the oak tree was a protected tree and 
met the conditions of a heritage tree under Section 18.10.09(b).  An arborist 
who cared for the tree for many years submitted a recommendation to the 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Council.  The existing house did not have a basement.  The tree's roots had 
never suffered a major violation of the soil.  He read a definition of tree 
removal.  He interpreted tree removal as anything could affect the soil within 
the tree's dripline.  The property owner purchased the property with the 
knowledge that the tree was a protected species.  The opinion of the 
Applicant's arborist was not to be utilized in an approval of a building permit.  
The Council's role was to protect the tree.  The issue was whether a basement 
should be allowed to invade the root space of a 300-year-old protected 
heritage tree.  The biggest threat to the oak tree was the construction of a 
massive basement.  Staff incorrectly referred to sections of the Code that did 
not apply to single-family homes.   
Keith Bennett, Appellant team advised that dewatering could be accomplished 
through the use of secant walls or broad area dewatering.  Per Wikipedia, 
valley oak trees required year-round access to groundwater.  Arborist Walter 
Levison explained that valley oak tree root systems extended much deeper 
than commonly thought.  Groundwater on the site was normally 7-11 feet 
below the surface.  The use of secant walls was probably not practical for the 
project.  Broad area dewatering was going to lower the water table 8-10 feet, 
which caused an intense, localized drought at the site.  He recommended a 
condition of approval that limited the basement floor surface to a maximum 
of 8 feet belowground.   
Yali Zhou, Applicant indicated her family had nurtured the tree.  She engaged 
two arborists to advise her on designing the new house without endangering 
the tree.  She hoped to move into the new house in 2021.   
Gordana Pavlovic, Applicant's designer appreciated the beauty of the tree and 
wanted to protect it.  A team of advisors and the Planning Department had 
guided the design of the new house.  At the closest point, the distance 
between the proposed house and the tree was 34 feet 4 inches.  A structural 
engineer was going to join the team to determine the best and least invasive 
structural solution for the project and to minimize, if not avoid, dewatering.  
Another engineer was to determine groundwater levels and the best time for 
construction.   
Elizabeth Lanham, Applicant's arborist related that tree roots could extend 20 
feet below the ground's surface.  About a third of the tree's life was spent in 
urban conditions, which meant any deep tree roots probably died and were 
replaced with surface roots.  The likelihood of the tree utilizing groundwater 
was low.  Mature oak trees did not have a deep tap root.  The majority of tree 
roots were located within the top 2 feet of soil.  The tree was showing signs 
of damage to its roots.  She thought removal of the tree could be approved 
because the TPZ covered slightly more than 50 percent of buildable lot space.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
According to City policy, a tree was considered for removal when the TPZ 
covered 25 percent.  Arborists involved in the project and her review of the 
project agreed that the tree had a better future with construction of a new 
home. 
Winter Dellenbach referred to Code Section 8.10.050(b) and noted a valley 
oak tree on her property had suffered from the construction of a home on the 
adjacent lot.  The Council needed to deny the application because of the 
proposed basement. 
Karen Holman indicated the Council should guide Staff in applying Code 
provisions to the project and allow an 8 foot basement only, no dewatering. 
Walter Levison, Appellant's arborist related that soils in Palo Alto allowed tree 
roots to grow deeper than expected.   
Rachel Tanner, Assistant Director of Planning and Development Services 
reported members of the Applicant and Appellant teams were not allowed to 
speak during public comment. 
Sandra Browman remarked that the basement should be eliminated from the 
project as construction of a basement damaged tree roots and required 
dewatering.   
Trish Goity did not believe damage to 17 percent of tree roots was acceptable.  
The effects of a basement was unknown.  The tree was irreplaceable. 
Anne Goess expressed concern about the lack of hydrology studies.  
Approximately ten years ago, a construction project on the next block had 
required dewatering, which probably weakened the tree.  Further dewatering 
damaged the tree.  She urged the homeowner not to build a basement 
because it would likely damage the tree.  (Comment translated by Sophie 
Chuan). 
Rebecca Eisenberg commented regarding verbal and print advisories about 
the tree when the property was on the market about five years earlier.  The 
Council's role was not to solve a private party's investment mistake.   
Ruth Benz referred to the neighborhood's efforts to save the tree and 
encouraged the Council to preserve the protected tree. 
Deb Goldeen remarked regarding the effects of construction on a heritage tree 
at a nearby property.  Street trees protected during construction but were in 
decline. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Dan Sakols stated the oak tree was a public landmark and should not be 
jeopardized.  The potential for damaging the tree was not justified by the 
benefit to a single family. 
Vincent de Martel commented that the homeowners were following the letter 
of ordinances instead of the spirit of ordinances.  Dewatering in other projects 
created issues in the neighborhood.  Simple changes to the house design 
mitigated the neighbors' concerns. 
Susan Heller shared her experience with a construction project on the adjacent 
property that damaged a protected tree on her property.  Conditions of 
approval and protections were worthless without enforcement. 
Mary Ellen White, Appellant, related that the groundwater table was 
approximately 6 feet below the ground surface.  The City's Tree Protection 
Ordinance needed to be enforced.   
Ms. Tanner noted Ms. White was an Appellant.   
Peter commented that a new home could be built without a basement, but the 
tree was not so easily replaced. 
Rob Levitsky hoped the tree could be saved. 
Curtis Smolar stated the Council was slowly taking citizens' rights.   
Cari Templeton encouraged the Council to take care of the canopy and species 
diversity.  Replacing the tree was not possible. 
Mr. Levison discussed the growth of tree roots and their use of groundwater.  
Temporarily removal of a tree's water supply threatened the tree's health.  
Dewatering had real effects on Palo Alto's trees.   
Mr. Morton indicated preserving and reducing risks to the tree did not require 
the reduction of the proposed house's footprint or square footage or relocation 
of the house because a basement was not included in floor area.   
Ms. Lanham advised that groundwater had probably not been the tree's main 
water supply for many years.  Treatments applied to the tree did stimulate 
surface root growth.  The design was developed to ensure the tree remained 
a resource. 
Lucas Ottoboni, Applicant team reported groundwater levels were determined 
prior to construction.  Dewatering depended upon groundwater level at the 
time of construction.  Construction was able to occur during the months that 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
groundwater was at its lowest level.  The soil was stiff clay, which was not 
conducive to deep root growth.   
Ms. Pavlovic, on behalf of Ms. Zhou, reported the size of the house was 
necessary for her four children and two parents. 
Public Hearing closed at 9:30 P.M. 
Council took a break at 9:30 P.M. and returned at 9:42 P.M. 
Mayor Fine noted the Council was adjudicating a decision, not negotiating a 
different outcome.  The Council needed to respect due process and existing 
laws.   
Council Member Filseth requested the depth of the proposed basement. 
Ms. Gerhardt responded 9 feet on the interior plus a couple of feet for the 
foundation. 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether an 11 foot basement reduced the 
groundwater table from 10 feet to 20 feet. 
Mike Nafziger, Public Works Senior Engineer explained that the excavation for 
a typical basement required 12-13 feet.  If the groundwater table was between 
9-9.5 feet, dewatering required that the water level be brought to 3 feet below 
the proposed excavation or about 15 feet.  The water table was going to be 
lowered 6-7 feet.  Once the basement was poured, dewatering was able to be 
reduced, and the water table was able to rise to approximately 1 foot below 
the slab.   
Council Member Filseth inquired about enforcing conditions of approval and 
construction plans. 
Mr. Nafziger reported Public Works inspectors visited dewatering sites daily, if 
not multiple times a day.  This project was going to be inspected regularly. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired whether the critical root zone extended under the 
house. 
Ms. Gerhardt advised that the TPZ defined by the Code was a standard circle, 
but Staff reviewed each project to determine the actual location of tree roots.   
Walter Passmore, Chief Arborist reported the Tree Technical Manual defined a 
TPZ radius.  Critical root zone was an industry term used in arborist reports.  
Oftentimes, TPZ and critical root zone were the same, but some professionals 
differentiated the two based on location and type of tree. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked what could be learned through soil excavation. 
Mr. Passmore related that the location of surface roots could be revealed.  
Ground penetrating radar was able to determine locations of deeper roots, but 
only to a depth of 5-10 feet.  Typically, 90 percent of tree roots were located 
in the top 18 inches of soil. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired whether arborists included the impacts of 
dewatering in their reports. 
Mr. Passmore answered no, unless it was specifically requested. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested the proposed shoring method for this project 
and asked if the proposed method would require dewatering. 
Ms. Gerhardt indicated the shoring method was determined during the 
building permit stage.  Staff believed the lagging method was the most 
beneficial for this project, but not all information was available for Staff to 
reach a final determination. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired regarding the method of construction for lagging.  
The conditions of approval did not mention construction equipment going into 
the tree canopy. 
Ms. Gerhardt advised that Staff did not recommend the use of secant walls 
because of concerns about equipment going into the canopy and the inability 
to avoid tree roots when drilling into the soil. 
Mr. Nafziger clarified that equipment in both methods penetrated the canopy, 
but the secant wall method precluded the ability to observe tree roots.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the lagging method would require dewatering. 
Mr. Nafziger replied yes.  The secant wall method required some dewatering 
once the wall was constructed.   
Council Member Kniss asked what occurred between the time the house was 
for sale and the present time that brought the matter and the community 
before the Council. 
Ms. Gerhardt indicated the tree was a protected tree, but not a heritage tree.  
Staff utilized Code provisions to ensure the tree was not removed.  
Construction was going to impact the tree but, based on Staff's past 
experiences, the tree was able to survive if less than 25 percent of the tree 
was removed.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Council Member Kniss inquired whether Staff utilized Code Section 8.10.050. 
Ms. Gerhardt advised that the Staff Report incorrectly referred to Section 
8.10.050(d).  The correct Code section was 8.10.050(b). 
Council Member Kniss asked if Staff believed the requirements would protect 
the tree. 
Ms. Gerhardt answered yes.   
Council Member Kniss asked if the basement depth could be 8 feet instead of 
the proposed 11 feet.  She understood someone would be living in the 
basement. 
Ms. Gerhardt indicated the Council could discuss ceiling heights but reducing 
the ceiling height reduced the overall height by a foot.  The applicants 
discussed constructing during the dry season when the groundwater level was 
lower.   
Council Member Kniss noted public comment regarding construction impacting 
trees and the inability to reverse damage to or the death of a tree.  She 
preferred an 8 foot basement. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the IR Guidelines excluded tree health. 
Ms. Gerhardt responded yes.  The main points of IR Guidelines were massing, 
streetscape and privacy.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the IR Guidelines addressed basement size 
and location. 
Ms. Gerhardt replied no.  The Municipal Code addressed basements. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the IR Guidelines addressed dewatering 
during construction. 
Ms. Gerhardt answered no.  Public Works procedures addressed dewatering. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff had ever utilized a condition of 
approval requiring daily arborist visits to a construction site. 
Mr. Passmore did not recall a previous requirement for daily inspections.   
Council Member Cormack requested Staff address Ms. Martineau's written 
comments.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Mr. Passmore reported Ms. Martineau's proposed conditions were reasonable, 
and typically Staff applied them during the building permit phase. 
Council Member Kou preferred a City arborist be onsite constantly during 
demolition.  Basements may be discretionary as there were no requirements 
for them.  If basements were discretionary, the Council needed to determine 
the appropriate depth to protect the tree.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney advised that the Code contained ministerial 
requirements for basements.   
Ms. Gerhardt added that Section 18.12.90 contained basement requirements. 
Council Member Kou did not believe the requirements included basement 
depth.  In this case, the Council was obligated to preserve the tree.   
Council Member Tanaka requested Staff's opinion of the arborists' reports. 
Mr. Passmore stated none of the arborists utilized specific data regarding the 
underground root structure of the tree, and the comments were general in 
nature.  He did not disagree with any of the general comments.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about soil conditions in Palo Alto and the 
depth of tree roots.   
Mr. Passmore noted the engineer stated the site soil had a high clay content, 
which indicated most of the root structure was concentrated in the top reaches 
of the soil.  He suspected very few of the tree's roots extended deep into the 
soil. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the proposed home could be located in the 
front setback and if the Council could authorize that. 
Ms. Gerhardt reported a variance to allow construction in the front setback 
was possible, but the applicant had not applied for a variance, and a variance 
had not been advertised.  Staff needed to consider the findings for a variance.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the possibility of requiring a bond for 
the tree. 
Mr. Passmore related that the Tree Technical Manual allowed Staff to collect a 
security deposit in special circumstances, but Staff had not required one in a 
residential project.  Staff was able to impose a security deposit of 25-100 
percent of the appraised value of the tree.  He appraised the value of the tree 
at $64,000; therefore, the amount of the deposit could be $16,000 to 
$64,000. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Council Member Tanaka asked if Staff had ever required a deposit. 
Mr. Passmore reiterated that deposits had been required for commercial 
projects. 
Mayor Fine requested the range of the Council's authority for this Item. 
Ms. Stump advised that the Council's authority was bounded by the IR 
program.  A number of areas in the IR Guidelines were appropriate for the 
Council's consideration.  The Council needed to deny the appeal and approve 
the Director's approval unless they were not able to make the findings. 
Ms. Gerhardt indicated Staff believed the project adhered to the Municipal 
Code and the IR Guidelines. 
Mayor Fine clarified that the Council should reject the appeal and approve the 
project if they were able to make the five IR findings.  If the Council was not 
able to make the findings, they needed to identify the findings they could not 
make.  He requested a brief description of the Tree Protection Plan for the 
tree.  
Ms. Gerhardt explained that the TPZ was 60 feet in diameter.  Staff required 
the supervision and use of hand tools when any type of construction occurred 
within the tree protection zone and required retention of parts of the existing 
foundation.   
Mr. Passmore added that Staff customized the Tree Protection Plan for each 
project.  The Proposed Tree Protection Plan for this project exceeded 
requirements, and Staff believed it was sufficient to prevent permanent 
damage to the tree or the tree's death.  Unique to this project were 
requirements for retention of portions of the existing foundation, daily 
inspections, and intensive arborist supervision.  Staff recognized the need to 
require additional protections for this tree. 
Council Member Kou asked if Staff had studied the site to know the depth of 
tree roots.   
Ms. Tanner replied no. 
Ms. Gerhardt added that Staff utilized ground penetrating radar for only one 
project in the past eight years. 
Council Member Kou remarked that data specific to the site and the tree was 
unknown.  She had many concerns about the tree and proposed protections.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois remarked that the height, mass, and scale of the house 
were out of character with the neighborhood; therefore, he was not able to 
make Findings 2 and 3.  Public comments pertained to the tree.  Construction 
on this site seemed risky for the tree.  He questioned whether the Applicant 
would consider a smaller basement further away from the tree or extending 
the basement aboveground in order to reduce its depth into the soil.  The 
arborists' reports offered conflicting information and opinions.  Additional 
testing and consideration of the water table was possibly warranted.  The 
arborist's recommendations needed to be explicit in the conditions of approval.  
The duration of the tree appraisal needed to be 15 years rather than 5 years.  
He inquired whether tie backs would be allowed in any of the construction 
methods for the project. 
Mr. Nafziger answered not for a single-level basement. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested the conditions of approval address the use of 
cranes beneath the tree's canopy. 
Mr. Nafziger related that Staff had not imposed conditions on crane activity.  
Staff was able to ensure the contractor was educated regarding the sensitivity 
of mobilizing cranes around the canopy. 
Council Member Filseth inquired about the impacts of the water table at 10 
feet and 14 feet if the tree's roots were located in the top 2 feet of soil. 
Ms. Tanner reiterated Mr. Passmore's statements that the roots were likely 
located within the top 2 feet of soil and that the tree's water supply was 
probably not groundwater. 
Council Member Filseth understood, based on Mr. Passmore's comments, that 
dewatering was irrelevant to the tree.  The relevant issues were the diameter 
of the TPZ and roots within the footprint of the house.   
Ms. Tanner indicated that the Appellants had raised dewatering as a significant 
issue of construction and a potential danger to the tree.   
Council Member Filseth suggested the use of ground penetrating radar to 
determine the depth of the tree's roots.   
Ms. Tanner reported Staff had not required applicants to utilize the technology 
for a tree. 
Mr. Passmore did not believe dewatering would have a significant impact on 
the tree. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Council Member Kniss asked if Vice Mayor DuBois suggested an 8 foot 
basement and having someone work with the applicant to achieve that. 
Vice Mayor DuBois reiterated his comments of a less deep basement and 
extending the basement aboveground.  
Mayor Fine reminded the Council that their role was to adjudicate the matter. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member Kou 
to add to the conditions of approval: 
A. 
Reduce the basement depth to 8 feet in total dimension, which includes 
the exterior wall; 
B. 
Add Catherine Martineau’s recommendations: 
i. 
Reporting tree protection compliance during construction. In 
addition to daily inspection reporting during demolition phase, a 
mandatory Contractor and Arborist Monthly Tree Activity Report 
shall be sent monthly to the City Urban Forester beginning with 
issuance of building permit, using the template in the Tree 
Technical Manual, Addendum 11. The Contractor and Owner shall 
implement any corrective actions as directed by project arborist 
or Urban Forester; 
ii. 
Basement and light well excavation should utilize vertical cut, I-
beam and lagging or other minimal-cut method that leaves rooting 
soil intact, if approved by the Urban Forester; and 
iii. 
The building permit shall include a comprehensive landscape plan 
prepared by a landscape architect, approved by both the Project 
Arborist and Urban Forester. The plan shall include plantings 
required by Condition Number 13, and in the rear yard specify 
Valley Oak compatible plant species comparable to Tree Technical 
Manual, Addendum 5, Landscaping Under Native Oaks; and 
C. 
To allow the plans to go up an additional 2 feet from the ground. 
Ms. Gerhardt asked if the 8 foot dimension applied to the basement interior 
or the total basement. 
Council Member Kniss answered the total basement. 
Ms. Stump advised the Council to obtain the Applicant's and Staff's comments 
regarding the feasibility and impacts of the proposed changes.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Mayor Fine clarified the Motion as adding conditions of approval to a project 
that had been neither approved nor denied.   
Vice Mayor DuBois interpreted Mayor Fine's comments as the Motion should 
approve the project subject to the additional conditions of approval. 
Ms. Tanner indicated Subpart C was unclear as to whether the entire house or 
only the basement was able to be 2 feet taller.  Ms. Martineau's conditions 
were typically part of the building permit process.  Including them now may 
preclude some action during the building permit process.  The minimum 
allowed ceiling height was 7 feet.  Depending upon the material and 
construction of the basement ceiling, an 8 foot basement could be usable and 
habitable. 
Mr. Nafziger explained that the total excavation depth would be about 12 feet 
for a basement with an 8 foot ceiling height.  If the total excavation depth was 
8 feet, the basement ceiling height was going to be less than 6 feet.  To comply 
with the 7 foot ceiling height requirement and the 8 foot excavation depth, 
the basement needed to extend aboveground.   
Ms. Gerhardt added that the IR analysis would change if the house was 2 feet 
taller. 
Council Member Kou requested the excavation depth for a basement with a 
10 foot ceiling height. 
Mr. Nafziger replied about 14 feet.  Typically, basements were not allowed to 
extend aboveground, but it was an option to provide a livable ceiling height 
with minimal excavation. 
Council Member Kou commented that another option was to eliminate the 
basement. 
Mayor Fine reported basements were not part of the IR Guidelines. 
Council Member Kniss noted many houses were built a couple of feet 
aboveground, sometimes 3-4 feet.   
Council Member Kou inquired whether the basement could have a 10 foot 
ceiling height, 8 feet belowground and 2 feet aboveground. 
Council Member Kniss responded yes.  
Ms. Tanner stated the Motion proposed significant changes to the project.  
Staff had to determine a way for the project to conform with existing 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
requirements and Subpart C.  The Applicant did not indicate their amenability 
to the proposed conditions. 
Council Member Kniss related that she was attempting to preserve the tree 
and provide the Applicants with the house they wanted. 
Ms. Gerhardt commented that Staff attempted to apply IR Guidelines 
consistently across projects.  Guideline 2 talked about locating upper floors 
well back from the front facade and/or away from the side lot lines if the house 
was adjacent to a single-story house.  The adjacent house to the left of the 
project site was one-story.   
Mayor Fine understood the Motion changed the massing, scale, shade, and 
elevations of the project. 
Ms. Pavlovic advised that she was attempting to process Council Members' 
comment, but they did not understand the input from the professional team.  
She had to determine her clients' wishes.  Increasing the height of the building 
violated the daylight plane.  She asked why the Council was discussing the 
depth of the basement when the City Arborist and two other arborists had 
agreed that the tree's roots did not exceed 2 feet in depth. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change the Motion to read, “… to approve the 
project with the following conditions: … .” 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Appellant's arborist wished to rebut Mr. 
Passmore's comments. 
Mr. Bennett read from Mr. Levison's letter and suggested Valley Oak Trees 
absorbed water through surface roots during the winter and spring and deep 
roots during the summer and fall.  At least three basements had been built 
without requiring excavation.  Normally, this was possible with an excavation 
depth of about 9.5 feet.   
Council Member Tanaka requested Mr. Passmore's response to Mr. Levison's 
letter. 
Mr. Passmore advised that he had received the letter that night.  Mr. Levison's 
letter used the words "in general" and did not reflect a site visit or review of 
soils reports.   
Mr. Bennett agreed that factual information about the site was unknown.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if the arborist saw the Soils Report. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Mr. Bennett indicated he did not. 
Vice Mayor DuBois interpreted the Motion as an attempt to avoid groundwater 
and dewatering.  If the depth of the project could be modified so as not to hit 
groundwater, the Motion would approve the project.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER  “… modify conditions of approval to: 
i. 
Direct Staff to add all recommendations from the Arborist Report 
as additional conditions of approval; 
ii. 
Change Condition Number 30 to read, “For the duration of hand 
demolition within the Tree Protection Zone, the project Arborist 
shall be on site to ensure that tree protection measures, materials 
and best practices are being employed by the contractor and on-
site foreman overseeing the work;” and 
iii. 
Change Condition Number 32 to read, “The tree appraisal duration 
period shall be ten years from the date of final occupancy … .” 
(New Part D) 
Council Member Kniss asked if Subpart C of the Motion should be deleted. 
Ms. Gerhardt reported if the height of the house increased by a foot, Staff was 
likely able to make the findings. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested combining Subparts A and C. 
Council Member Kniss agreed. 
Ms. Tanner stated there was no scenario of excavation that did not require 
dewatering.  If the goal was to avoid dewatering, it was not achieved through 
the Motion.   
Mayor Fine reiterated that the Council was to evaluate the project in light of 
IR Guidelines, which did not include basements and trees. 
Mayor Fine announced Agenda Item Number 3 was continued. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by 
Council Member Filseth to uphold the Planning and Development Services 
Director’s approval of the Individual Review (IR) application. (File No. 18PLN-
00339). 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Council Member Cormack reviewed all information provided to the Council and 
could make the required findings.   
Council Member Filseth believed the three arborists agreed that the depth of 
the tree roots depended on the soil, but the City Arborist was the only one to 
look at the soil.  The Council was attempting to modify the design of the 
proposed house.  He inquired about the threat to the tree, assuming it had 
some deep roots, if the water table dropped from 10 feet to 15 feet. 
Mr. Passmore reported it was unlikely the tree's roots would consistently draw 
water from that depth, especially during the term of construction.  The impact 
was fairly minimal.  Arborists never predicted zero impact.  The tree was able 
to tolerate the impact, and its health and longevity were not significantly 
changed. 
Ms. Tanner advised that the Applicants' arborist reviewed the Soils Report, 
but the Appellant's arborist had not. 
Council Member Filseth asked if irrigation could compensate for lowering the 
water table. 
Mr. Passmore answered yes.  The Arborist Report required supplemental 
irrigation as needed.  The Applicants were treating the area under protection 
to enhance new root growth. 
Council Member Filseth believed Staff's work was thorough.  The impacts of 
dewatering were unlikely, but unknown.   
Mayor Fine was able to make the IR findings.  Staff's approach to protecting 
the tree was correct.  The Council was not authorized to privilege an area 
outside the IR process to potentially and negatively affect areas inside the IR 
process.  The Applicant had followed the rules, and the Council should as well. 
Vice Mayor DuBois proposed amending the Substitute Motion to include 
recommendations from the arborist's Report as conditions of approval and to 
change Condition of Approval Numbers 30 and 32. 
Council Member Cormack indicated the arborist's recommendations were 
already part of the conditions of approval. 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted all recommendations stated explicitly in the 
conditions of approval. 
Ms. Gerhardt advised that the conditions of approval referred to and required 
compliance with all of the arborist's recommendations.  The arborist Report 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
was also a part of the project plans, which was available to contractors on the 
site. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether Vice Mayor DuBois wanted the 
arborist onsite all day every day during demolition. 
Vice Mayor DuBois responded yes. 
Council Member Cormack requested the scope of work and length of an 
arborist's daily visit. 
Mr. Passmore reported visits typically occurred at milestone events and any 
work that was especially sensitive.  The arborist was to spend as much as 
needed to inspect activities.  Activities for much of a day may not require an 
arborist's supervision. 
Ms. Tanner suggested adding that demolition would include more than digging 
and excavation work because the home had to be demolished.   
Council Member Cormack inquired whether a daily visit was sufficient to 
protect the tree and ameliorate potential damage.   
Mr. Passmore reiterated that the proposed conditions of approval were far 
more extensive than any the City had imposed.  More inspection was obviously 
better, which the condition for daily inspections attempted to implement.  Very 
few conditions of approval were violated.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER, “… and change Condition Number 32 to read, “The 
tree appraisal duration period shall be ten years from the date of final 
occupancy … .” 
AMENDMENT TO THE SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, 
seconded by Council Member Kou to add to the Substitute Motion: 
A. 
Direct Staff to add all recommendations from the Arborist Report as 
additional conditions of approval; and  
B. 
Change Condition Number 30 to read, “For the duration of hand 
demolition within the Tree Protection Zone, the project Arborist shall be 
on site to ensure that tree protection measures, materials and best 
practices are being employed by the contractor and on-site foreman 
overseeing the work.” 
Council Member Kou believed an onsite arborist could remedy any potential 
impact and supervise contractors.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Mayor Fine felt Subpart i was redundant, not harmful, and somewhat 
disrespectful of Staff.  Subpart ii was unreasonable and an imposition on the 
Applicant. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding the cost of using ground 
penetrating radar.  
Ms. Gerhardt indicated it would be very expensive, especially for a single-
family home. 
Mr. Passmore added that a rough cost estimate was $5,000, but ground 
penetrating radar would provide limited information.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if it could be used during excavation, such that 
digging and searching for roots could alternate. 
Ms. Tanner commented that the Item before the Council was an IR hearing, 
and the basement and tree were not subject to the hearing.  It would be 
unusual to require actions based on other actions, which made advancing the 
project difficult.  The Item needed to be continued if the Council wished to do 
that. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the process for using ground penetrating 
radar. 
Mr. Passmore indicated it was most accurate at depths of 5 feet but was able 
to detect roots at depths of 20 feet.  The accuracy diminished with depth. 
Ms. Pavlovic disclosed that the depth of the existing basement was 9 feet.  
Prior to the meeting, she discussed increasing the building height by 6 inches 
to reduce the depth of the basement with Ms. Gerhardt.  The project 
minimized dewatering as much as possible.  She inquired whether the Motion 
proposed 8 feet as the ceiling height or the depth of excavation for the 
basement.  
Ms. Stump stated the Council was considering the Substitute Motion.  If it did 
not pass, the Council was going to return to the Motion, and the Applicant was 
able to speak at that time. 
Mayor Fine requested the Applicant comment regarding the amended 
Substitute Motion. 
Ms. Pavlovic agreed to the terms of the amended Substitute Motion. 
Council Member Filseth indicated requiring an arborist to be onsite all day 
every day was a waste of time. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Ms. Tanner clarified that the Applicant would have to hire a third-party arborist 
to be onsite.  It involved a great amount of money and time. 
Council Member Kniss remarked that the application was before the Council 
because of the tree, and the Applicant knew about the protected tree prior to 
purchasing the property. 
Council Member Cormack asked if people were allowed to appeal an IR 
decision based on trees. 
Ms. Stump advised that the issue was not contained within the IR process, but 
the City had not previously rejected an appeal based on concerns about a tree.  
The appeal was processed and denied because trees were not contained within 
the parameters of the program.  In the spirit of public participation, the appeal 
was processed even though it did not involve an appealable subject under the 
IR program. 
Council Member Kou remarked that Staff should not accept an appeal and the 
Appeal Fee if the subject on appeal was not appealable. 
AMENDMENT TO THE SUBSTITUTE MOTION PASSED:  4-3 Cormack, 
Filseth, Fine no 
Council Member Kou proposed amending the Substitute Motion to conduct a 
Ground Penetrating Radar Study in order to remove any doubt about the tree 
roots. 
Council Member Cormack requested the anticipated result of the Study. 
Council Member Kou advised that it could determine the location and depth of 
roots. 
Council Member Cormack asked how the Applicant, or the Council could utilize 
that knowledge. 
Council Member Kou indicated it could inform the building permit process. 
Ms. Tanner reported that the Study could confirm current knowledge and fail 
to confirm the existence of deep roots.   
Mr. Passmore explained that the Study would assess roots within the building 
footprint.  Usually that occurred before Staff approved a final design.  If the 
Study revealed a significant number of roots, Staff needed to evaluate the 
remainder of the TPZ to determine if it constituted a significant impact to the 
tree.  It significantly delayed the project and was possibly going to cause 
major changes to the project design.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Council Member Cormack declined the proposed Amendment. 
AMENDMENT TO THE SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, 
seconded by Council Member XX to direct the applicant to perform a ground 
penetrating radar study. 
AMENDMENT TO THE SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK 
OF A SECOND 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION AS AMENDED: Council Member Cormack moved, 
seconded by Council Member Filseth to uphold the Planning and Development 
Services Director’s approval of the Individual Review (IR) application (File No. 
18PLN-00339) and: 
A. 
Direct Staff to add all recommendations from the Arborist Report as 
additional conditions of approval; 
B. 
Change Condition Number 30 to read, “For the duration of hand 
demolition within the Tree Protection Zone, the project Arborist shall be 
on site to ensure that tree protection measures, materials and best 
practices are being employed by the contractor and on-site foreman 
overseeing the work.”; and 
C. 
Change Condition Number 32 to read, “The tree appraisal duration 
period shall be ten years from the date of final occupancy…”.  
SUBSTITUTE MOTION AS AMENDED FAILED:  3-4 DuBois, Kniss, Kou, 
Tanaka no 
Ms. Tanner was unsure whether Subpart A resulted in a habitable basement; 
perhaps it could be amended to indicate the interior of the basement could be 
8 feet in height. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to restate Motion, Part A to read, “Reduce the 
basement depth to an 8-foot ceiling height and allow 1-foot above grade;” 
Mayor Fine requested the Applicant comment on the amended Motion. 
Ms. Pavlovic agreed to an 8 foot ceiling height and believed she could design 
the project in compliance with IR Guidelines. 
Council Member Kou understood the ceiling height would be 9 feet, 8 feet 
belowground and 1 foot aboveground. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Ms. Gerhardt interpreted the Motion as the ceiling height would be 8 feet, 7 
feet belowground.  The excavation was to be 7 feet, including the thickness of 
the foundation.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager understood Council Member Kniss' intention was to 
minimize the necessity of dewatering.   
Ms. Pavlovic stated the Applicant wanted to avoid dewatering and would have 
more information if the Council allowed the project to proceed. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed amending the Motion to include a ground 
penetrating radar Study.  If the Study revealed no deep roots, the project was 
able to proceed as proposed.  Otherwise, the requirements of the Motion 
needed to be implemented. 
Council Member Kniss agreed to conducting a Study but not any provisions 
dependent on the results of the Study. 
Council Member Kou preferred a requirement to avoid dewatering or to 
minimize dewatering as much as possible. 
Council Member Kniss declined to amend the Motion. 
Mayor Fine did not support the Motion because Ms. Martineau's 
recommendations had not been evaluated and designing the project during a 
meeting was dangerous.  He inquired whether Subpart A could trigger a 
second IR process. 
Ms. Stump noted Staff's review involved many hours and great care.  
Changing the project without allowing Staff to analyze the changes fully was 
a concern.  She encouraged the Council to consider its decision as final and 
not subject to further appeal.  The IR process was intended to allow the 
construction of single-family homes without a great deal of review and 
involvement.   
Mayor Fine remarked that if the Council wished to consider trees and 
basements in the IR process, they needed to update their IR Guidelines and 
process.   
Council Member Cormack asked if Subpart A required the Applicant to redesign 
the house. 
Ms. Gerhardt answered no. 
Council Member Cormack asked if it required the Applicant to expend 
additional time and funds.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
Ms. Tanner believed the Applicant would expend some funds and time to 
redesign the project. 
Council Member Cormack remarked that the Council redesigning a project was 
not appropriate, especially when the project complied with all requirements.  
Mr. Passmore stated that Ms. Martineau's recommendations would be 
addressed in the building permit process.  Requiring an arborist to be onsite 
at all times was an unnecessary expense.  The Applicant had followed the 
rules.  Staff had seriously considered all concerns about the tree and had 
imposed mitigations.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding additional language in the Motion 
that indicated the Council's decision was final. 
Ms. Stump indicated the language of Council approval created the finality. 
Council Member Kou did not believe the Council was redesigning the project.  
The Motion addressed the appeal.   
Council Member Filseth remarked that Subpart B was useful, but Subpart C 
did not add value.  Subpart A had no practical effect. 
Ms. Pavlovic advised that the Applicant would do what was best for the tree.  
She had to review the Council's requirements to determine their effects on the 
project.   
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Kniss moved, 
seconded by Council Member Kou to approve the project with the following 
conditions: 
A. 
Reduce the basement depth to 8-foot ceiling height and allow 1 foot 
above grade; 
B. 
Add Catherine Martineau’s recommendations: 
i. 
Reporting tree protection compliance during construction. In 
addition to daily inspection reporting during demolition phase, a 
mandatory Contractor and Arborist Monthly Tree Activity Report 
shall be sent monthly to the City Urban Forester beginning with 
issuance of building permit, using the template in the Tree 
Technical Manual, Addendum 11. The Contractor and Owner shall 
implement any corrective actions as directed by project arborist 
or Urban Forester; 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
ii. 
Basement and light well excavation should utilize vertical cut, I-
beam and lagging or other minimal-cut method that leaves rooting 
soil intact, if approved by the Urban Forester; and 
iii. 
The building permit shall include a comprehensive landscape plan 
prepared by a landscape architect, approved by both the Project 
Arborist and Urban Forester. The plan shall include plantings 
required by Condition #13, and in the rear yard specify Valley Oak 
compatible plant species comparable to Tree Technical Manual, 
Addendum 5, Landscaping Under Native Oaks; and 
C. 
 Modify conditions of approval to: 
i. 
Direct Staff to add all recommendations from the Arborist Report 
as additional conditions of approval; 
ii. 
Change Condition Number 30 to read, “For the duration of hand 
demolition within the Tree Protection Zone, the project Arborist 
shall be on site to ensure that tree protection measures, materials 
and best practices are being employed by the contractor and on-
site foreman overseeing the work.”; and 
iii. 
Change Condition Number 32 to read, “The tree appraisal duration 
period shall be ten years from the date of final occupancy…”.  
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  4-3 Cormack, Filseth, Fine no 
3. 
Staff and Utilities Advisory Commission Recommend the City Council 
Adopt a Resolution Amending the City's Electric Supply Portfolio Carbon 
Neutral Plan and Electric Utility Reserves Management Practices. (THIS 
ITEM HAS BEEN CONTINUED TO AUGUST 24, 2020) 
4. 
PUBLIC HEARING/LEGISLATIVE: Adoption of Several Ordinances 
Regarding Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units 
Amending Palo Alto Municipal Code Titles 16 (Building) and 18 (Zoning). 
Amendments Include Repealing Section 18.42.040 (Accessory and 
Junior Accessory Dwelling Units); Adding a new Chapter 18.09 
(Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units); 
Updating Chapters 18.04 (Definitions); 16.58 (Development Impact 
Fees); 16.04 (California Building Code); 16.06 (California Residential 
Code); and 16.14 (California Green Building Standards Code). 
Environmental Assessment: Exempt From Review Under the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Pursuant to Q&A 3 August 17, 2020 
MATERIALS RELATED TO AN ITEM ON THIS AGENDA SUBMITTED TO 
THE CITY COUNCIL AFTER DISTRIBUTION OF THE AGENDA PACKET ARE 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 26 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  08/17/2020 
AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION IN THE CITY CLERK’S OFFICE AT 
PALO ALTO CITY HALL, 250 HAMILTON AVE. DURING NORMAL 
BUSINESS HOURS. Public Resources Code Section 21080.17 and CEQA 
Guidelines Sections 15061(b)(3), 15282(h), 15301, 15302 and 15305 
(THIS ITEM HAS BEEN CONTINUED TO SEPTEMBER 14, 2020) 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack announced the Policy Committee of the Bay Area 
Water Supply and Conservation Agency (BAWSCA) had recommended 
BAWSCA not proceed with the Los Vaqueros Project, a storage project in the 
East Bay.  Water supply was functioning during power outages.  Critical San 
Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC) facilities were not at risk from 
the Marsh Complex wildfire.  She requested Council Member Kou provide any 
information from the recent meeting of the airplane noise roundtable, if she 
had attended the meeting. 
Mayor Fine noted the United States Postal Service had delayed plans to 
remove postal boxes in Palo Alto.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 12:13 A.M. 
