CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 16 
Regular Meeting 
March 2, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers at 6:06 P.M. 
Present:  
Cormack, DuBois participating remotely, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, 
Tanaka 
Absent: 
Kou 
Study Session 
1. 
Semiannual Update on the Status of Capital Improvement Program 
Projects. 
Brad Eggleston, Director of Public Works reported the Council adopted the 
Infrastructure Plan in 2014.  One of the projects was completed, and others 
were underway.  A significant portion of Infrastructure Plan projects were 
funded with voter-approved increases in the Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT).  
Fire Station Number 3, the first Infrastructure Plan project to be constructed, 
was projected to be completed under budget.  A ribbon-cutting ceremony and 
open house was scheduled for March 21, 2020.  Design of Fire Station Number 
4 was going to begin soon.  Features of Fire Station Number 3 included drive-
through apparatus bays, an exhaust capture system, male and female 
dormitory rooms, photovoltaic (PV) panels, an electric vehicle (EV) charger 
parking space, a public plaza and a bicycle repair station. 
Geo Blackshire, Fire Chief advised that features of Fire Station Number 3 
would improve response times and increase safety.  He looked forward to 
welcoming residents to the new station. 
Mr. Eggleston indicated the California Avenue parking garage was under 
construction and on track for completion in late summer, 2020.  The use of 
secant walls in below-grade construction had greatly reduced the amount of 
groundwater pumped from the site.  Staff worked closely with California 
Avenue merchants to provide alternative parking spaces during construction 
of the parking garage.  Construction of the new Public Safety Building (PSB) 
at an estimated cost of $118 million was going to begin in the fall of 2020.  
Staff anticipated presenting a construction contract for Council approval in 
August, 2020.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
Robert Jonsen, Police Chief related that the new PSB would be state of the 
art; it was going to improve morale and productivity and accommodate all 
police operations, the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and have a 
multipurpose training room.   
Holly Boyd, Assistant Director of Public Works reported construction of the 
Highway 101 Bike Bridge was underway with site preparation.  The County of 
Santa Clara (County) authorized an additional $1.5 million in funding for the 
project.  A groundbreaking ceremony was planned for April, 2020.  Phases 1 
and 2 of the Charleston/Arastradero Corridor were complete, and Phase 3 was 
scheduled to begin in the summer of 2020 and to finish in the fall of 2020.  In 
response to community concerns, the Public Works Department trimmed trees 
along the Palo Alto/Los Altos Bike Path.  The Charleston/Arastradero Corridor 
Project included Green Stormwater Infrastructure (GSI).  An Automated 
Parking Guidance System (APGS) would be installed at the California Avenue 
parking garage and would display parking availability.   
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Officer advised that the APGS would 
improve the motorists' parking experience and collect data for the Office of 
Transportation. 
Ms. Boyd indicated the Downtown parking garage would provide 324 parking 
spaces and 2,000 square feet of ground-floor retail.  The project was on hold 
pending review of the Downtown parking supply options.  The sludge 
dewatering building at the Regional Water Quality Control Plan was completed 
in 2019.  Staff was working on an electric system replacement, a 
laboratory/operations center, an upgrade of the biological process, and a salt 
removal unit process.  Utilities' projects included a new Citywide GIS and 
upgrades to major equipment and the physical security of substations. 
Dean Batchelor, Director of Utilities Department stated replacement of utility 
infrastructure was an ongoing, long-term project.   
Mr. Eggleston related that cost management had been a key factor in capital 
projects.  Delaying a capital project increased the cost by $350,000 per 
month.  To minimize cost escalation, Staff planned to remain on schedule with 
projects, had obtained two cost estimates for projects, had utilized value-
engineering exercises and had implemented a contractor prequalification 
process.  All Infrastructure Plan projects needed to be complete within the 
next three to four years.  Future projects were rail grade separations, the 
Cubberley Concept Plan, Parks Master Plan projects, renovation of the existing 
PSB and Phase 2 of the Junior Museum and Zoo Project.   
Council Member Cormack asked if a contract construction manager had been 
used for the Mitchell Park Library. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
Mr. Eggleston answered yes, but the firm was not involved in the design of 
the project.   
Council Member Cormack assumed lessons learned from the Bike Boulevard 
Project would be carried into Phase 3 of the Charleston/Arastradero Corridor 
Project.  The existing conditions survey of Cubberley Community Center were 
going to aid the City in addressing safety concerns.  She inquired whether the 
Boulware Park Project could be moved forward. 
Mr. Eggleston advised that Staff was designing the Boulware Park Project.  
2022 was the completion date for the project.   
Council Member Cormack was excited by the prospect of a California Avenue 
Public Art Plan and appreciated the Recycled Water Project.  The Newell Road 
Bridge Project needed to be aligned with the Upstream Project.   
Council Member Kniss asked if the speed of constructing the California Avenue 
parking garage could be credited to the construction manager. 
Mr. Eggleston indicated the project's contractor had a good reputation and 
many years of experience; he was also working Saturdays to remain on 
schedule.   
Council Member Kniss noted the City was saving money with fast construction.  
She asked if the contract provided a bonus for completing construction on 
schedule. 
Mr. Eggleston replied no. 
Council Member Kniss recalled that the Council first discussed a bike bridge in 
2011.  She asked if the City could seek additional funding from the County. 
Mr. Eggleston reported the City requested more than $1.5 million, but $1.5 
million was the amount the County authorized.  Once Staff obtained 
construction bids for a project, Staff could finalize a budget for the project.   
Council Member Kniss believed drivers would appreciate the APGS in the 
California Avenue garage and encouraged Staff to invite Council Members to 
view projects under construction. 
Council Member Filseth inquired whether maintenance costs at Cubberley 
were $1.3 million per year. 
Mr. Eggleston seemed to recall the amount allocated to the Cubberley 
Infrastructure Fund was approximately $1.8 million per year, but not all of the 
funds were expended each year.  Recent projects probably had increased 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
costs.  Roof replacements were programmed annually.  Funding for the 
Cubberley Repairs Project had been re-appropriated into forward years.  In 
Fiscal Year (FY) 2019, $84,000 was expended for the Repairs Project. 
Council Member Filseth requested a rough estimate of the cost to renovate 
the existing PSB. 
Mr. Eggleston indicated the project cost was estimated at $15-20 million. 
Council Member Filseth requested comment regarding the Downtown parking 
garage and the need for additional parking. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager related that vacancies in the Downtown area 
increased. 
Mr. Kamhi added that permit prices had increased, and other parking options 
were more attractive.  He thought the use of alternative modes of transport 
may contribute to a decrease in the need for parking spaces. 
Mayor Fine reported the Policy and Services Committee would review the 
Downtown Garage Project in spring, 2020. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding the projected decrease in TOT 
revenues. 
Mr. Eggleston clarified that his comments pertained to the difference in TOT 
funding for projects and for debt service.  
Council Member Tanaka questioned the practicality of renovating the existing 
PSB.   
Mr. Shikada indicated the existing PSB would be utilized by City operations. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if occupants for the existing PSB had been 
identified. 
Mr. Shikada reported a survey of department needs was underway.   
Council Member Tanaka proposed a Study Session to prioritize infrastructure 
projects.  He requested Staff include the increases and decreases in 
construction costs and the dates in the Staff Report.  The Downtown Parking 
Garage needed to be designed so that it could be repurposed, if the project 
was to go forward.  The economy was going to soften at some point, and 
construction costs were projected to decrease. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois believed the Council was fulfilling promises for 
infrastructure projects.  A Business Tax as a General Tax was a way to fund 
projects and ongoing Operational Costs.   
Mayor Fine indicated Maintenance Costs for some facilities may be impractical 
in light of a longer-term solution for the facilities.  Some of the upcoming 
projects served residents and were possibly going to need specific funding.  A 
Business Tax was able to serve other needs.   
Mr. Shikada thought a blog post was a good way to share the presentation 
with the community. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None. 
Oral Communications 
Liz Gardner remarked that the California Avenue Parking Garage Project was 
creating a great deal of dust.  She inquired about the City's plans for handling 
public reaction to the coronavirus.   
Bill Ross noted the Council's Policies and Protocols did not limit the number of 
Council Members who could participate in Council meetings telephonically.  
The City Clerk's decision appeared to be arbitrary. 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 3. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 2-4. 
2. 
Acceptance of the Northwest County Recycled Water Strategic Plan 
Report. 
3. 
Review of the Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Mid-year Budget Status, Approve 
Budget Amendments in Various Funds, and Amend the Salary Schedules 
for Services Employees’ International Union - Hourly (SEIU - H) and 
Limited Hourly (HRLY) Groups in Accordance with the City's 2020 
Minimum Wage Ordinance. 
4. 
Adoption of an Ordinance Amending Chapter 1.12 (Administrative 
Penalties – Citations) to Provide for an Administrative Hearing Upon 
Partial Advance Deposit of $250 and Clarify Existing Procedures for 
Hearings. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 2 AND 4:  6-0 Kou absent 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 3:  5-1 Tanaka no, Kou 
absent 
Council Member Tanaka disagreed with some of the overtime revisions. 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager reported the City was monitoring local 
developments regarding the coronavirus, reviewing emergency response 
scenarios and increasing community communications.   
Ken Dueker, Chief of the Office of Emergency Services advised that the County 
of Santa Clara (County) declared a local emergency in order to facilitate the 
exchange of information and the coordination of responses.  Staff was 
communicating with the Chamber of Commerce, Stanford Hospital, Palo Alto 
Medical Foundation (PAMF), Palo Alto Unified School District (PAUSD) and 
other strategic partners.   
Mr. Shikada shared tips to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.  The City 
expanded 9-1-1 call protocols and were evaluating service delivery 
modifications, supplying protective gear for first responders and providing 
sanitizers and enhanced cleaning in public facilities.  A webpage with current 
information was available on the City website.   
Mayor Fine emphasized the importance of daily updates and use of the 
Business Registry to share information with local businesses.   
Council Member Cormack requested Staff consider seniors in their planning 
efforts. 
Mr. Shikada explained that Staff had recognized the various segments of the 
community in preparing communications and messaging. 
Council Member Kniss asked about the plan to distribute hand sanitizer and 
cleaning products throughout City facilities. 
Mr. Shikada related that enhanced cleaning began in some facilities.  If the 
City found an excess supply of cleaning products, they were going to consider 
being a resource for others. 
Council Member Tanaka hoped the City would improve its teleconferencing 
capabilities for Staff and the Council. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
Mr. Shikada noted outreach for the potential Business Tax was ongoing, with 
an online survey and small group meetings.  The State of the City address 
was scheduled for March 4, 2020.  Council Member Kou was attending the 
University of California (UC) Davis Aviation Noise and Emissions Symposium. 
Council took a break at 7:43 P.M. and returned at 7:57 P.M. 
Action Items 
5. 
Resolution 9882 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto to Extend the Bicycle and Electric Scooter Share Pilot Program for 
One Year.” 
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official reported Bikeshare Programs were 
being replaced with Scooter Share Programs.  Staff revised the previously 
approved pilot program to reflect lessons learned and changes in 
micromobility.  Permittees needed to propose incentivized parking areas for 
key destinations.  In this way, permittees were going to indicate locations 
where usage was to be sustainable.  Staff recommended eliminating the cap 
on the number of devices.  Instead, permittees had to justify their proposed 
fleet sizes.  Permittees had to submit a Community Engagement Plan for 
approval by Staff and complete the outreach process prior to deploying any 
devices.  The City was able to charge a per-device fee to remove and store 
devices that were not properly parked.  Permittees had to provide a 
Performance Bond.  Staff recommended an incentive for permittees that 
provided both bikes and scooters so that Staff could test both.  Permittees 
had to provide affordable rates for low-wage users.  The pilot program needed 
to be reviewed six to nine months after its initiation.   
Sam Kang, Lime, supported implementation of the pilot program and shared 
usage data for Lime scooters.   
Adina Levin, Transit Caltrain commented that Mountain View and Sunnyvale 
would consider Micromobility Programs later in the year.  She encouraged the 
Council to approve the Revised Pilot Program to learn whether micromobility 
could work. 
Ken Kirshner suggested the prohibiting the parking scooters in bike lanes.  
Devices needed to be located near public transit for first-mile and last-mile 
usage.  Rebalancing needed to be concentrated near transit in the morning 
and at employment centers in the afternoon.  Helmets had to be required. 
Council Member Tanaka noted mobility was a Council Priority, and traffic 
congestion was of primary concern for residents.  The Pilot Program supported 
both.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to adopt 
a Resolution approving a one-year extension of the bicycle and electric scooter 
share pilot program through March 31, 2021. 
Council Member Tanaka concurred with the suggestion to prohibit scooter 
parking in bike lanes and inquired whether that needed to be added to the 
Motion. 
Mr. Kamhi explained that the guidelines required scooters to be parked legally 
and specified locations.  Bike lanes were not included in the specific locations.  
The guidelines were not before the Council for adoption; therefore, Staff was 
able to revise the guidelines. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the rationale for requiring scooter users to 
have driver's licenses.  
Mr. Kamhi indicated the companies that provided scooters required users to 
have driver's licenses. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney added that State law required users to have 
driver's licenses. 
Council Member Tanaka noted the difficulty of integrating Clipper Cards and 
suggested that requirement be eliminated from the Pilot Program. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified that use of a Clipper Card was an innovative option and 
not a requirement.  Staff was able to revise the language. 
Council Member Tanaka commented that the cost of a ride was already very 
low.  In addition, verifying eligibility for a low-wage program was difficult. 
Mr. Kamhi related that the provision was contained in the previous pilot 
programs.  He commented that a low-wage worker who depended on 
micromobility for daily transportation may not find the cost affordable. 
Council Member Tanaka felt administering a low-wage program was a 
challenge, especially for a pilot program. 
Mr. Kang reported Lime provided a robust low-income program.  Lime often 
negotiated the terms of low-income programs with cities. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to remove the low-wage requirement. 
Mayor Fine encouraged Staff to consider some benefit for a company that 
offered a low-income program.  The pilot program was a small step to reducing 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
congestion.  Scooter programs worked in cities around the world.  He asked if 
a one-year program would provide sufficient data. 
Mr. Kamhi reported Staff wanted to collect at least six months of data.  One 
year was long enough to collect data and short enough to make adjustments. 
Mayor Fine requested the rationale for including libraries in the incentivized 
parking areas. 
Mr. Kamhi wanted permittees to propose and justify incentivized parking 
areas.  The locations were examples of key destinations that Staff would like 
to have incentivized.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if Staff had considered a maximum number of 
devices. 
Mr. Kamhi stated permittees would have to provide a justification for the 
number of devices they proposed to deploy.  Permittees in cities similar in size 
to Palo Alto had deployed about 500 devices.  The critical factor was per device 
usage so that permittees made a profit and remained in business. 
Vice Mayor DuBois supported setting a maximum number of devices for the 
City and not allowing a single permittee to deploy the maximum number of 
devices.  Data sharing was important.  He expressed interest in the longer-
term program generating revenue or benefits for the City.   
Council Member Cormack inquired about the problem the pilot program was 
trying to solve. 
Mr. Kamhi explained that micromobility was often utilized for first and last-
mile transportation, was an option for short trips and was fun to ride. 
Council Member Cormack requested the average length of a ride. 
Mr. Kamhi stated that would be part of the data collected from the pilot 
program. 
Council Member Cormack requested the average cost for a ride. 
Mr. Kamhi explained that an activation fee and a per ride or per time fee were 
charged. 
Council Member Cormack asked about the definition of an incentivized parking 
area. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
Mr. Kamhi indicated the main challenge with scooter programs was riders 
parking scooters anywhere and everywhere.  Incentivized parking areas were 
safe locations where scooters could be parked.  Users received some type of 
incentive or discount for parking scooters in the incentivized parking areas. 
Council Member Cormack asked if there were safety concerns because not all 
scooters operated in the same manner. 
Mr. Kamhi reported users would have to complete an educational program to 
learn how to operate scooters before they could take one for a ride. 
Council Member Cormack asked why this pilot program could be successful 
when the prior two programs were not successful. 
Mr. Kamhi related that companies had already contacted Staff about the 
program.  Companies were probably interested in the previous programs, but 
guidelines for the programs had never been completed. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about storage on the scooters. 
Mr. Kamhi saw baskets on bikes but not on scooters. 
Council Member Cormack asked how the 15 miles per hour speed limit would 
be enforced. 
Mr. Kamhi understood the Vehicle Code imposed a speed limit of 15 miles per 
hour. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the guidelines required users to wear a 
helmet. 
Ms. Stump advised that State law required helmets for riders under age 18 
but was silent for riders over age 18.  The City was not able to regulate the 
wearing of helmets. 
Council Member Filseth commented that the use model was not well 
understood.  He found few disadvantages to approving a pilot program. 
Council Member Kniss anticipated some problems but would not oppose the 
pilot program. 
Council Member Filseth stated scooter litter could be a reason for terminating 
the pilot program. 
Mr. Kamhi expected to receive complaints about scooters, but lessons learned 
from other programs were implemented in the guidelines.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Mayor 
Fine to adopt a Resolution approving a one-year extension of the bicycle and 
electric scooter share pilot program through March 31, 2021 with the following 
changes: 
A. 
Remove the low-wage requirement. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-0 Kou absent 
6. 
Review of the Report on the Palo Alto History Museum (Roth Building, 
300 Homer Avenue) Fundraising Goal and Discussion of Options and 
Direction for the Next Steps. 
David Ramberg, Assistant Director of Administrative Services reported the City 
purchased the Roth Building in 2000, and the Council leased it to the Palo Alto 
History Museum (PAHM) in 2005.  In 2019, a building permit was issued for 
renovation of the Roth Building.  PAHM raised approximately $7.7 million in 
donations and pledges; $2 million of the pledges were reserved for Phase 2 of 
the project.  Of the $800,000 that remained in pledges, $242,000 to $583,000 
was likely to be collected.  PAHM spent $3.6 million on operating expenses 
since 2000.  Consequently, PAHM had about $1.9 million in cash as of 
November, 2019.  Funding for Phase 1 construction was $2.4-$2.9 million 
short of the projected construction cost of $9.2 million.  Given the funding 
gap, the Council was able to authorize Staff to issue a Request for Proposal 
(RFP) for alternative uses of the site.  The Roth Building was zoned Public 
Facility (PF).  A second option was to stabilize the Roth Building at an 
estimated cost of $8.5 million; however, the building was not ready for 
occupancy following stabilization.  Funding of $6.2 million was available for 
stabilizing the building.  A third option was to share the facility between PAHM 
and another entity.   
Laura Bajuk, Executive Director Palo Alto History Museum advised that the 
lack of a construction date was inhibiting corporate fundraising and 
partnerships with nonprofit agencies.  Of the $3.6 million in expenses, $2 
million was paid for capital expenses.  A total of $1.6 million was spent for 
expenses over 18 years.   
Elizabeth Rubinfien suggested the City pay for rehabilitation costs and PAHM 
pay for construction of a museum.  She encouraged the Council to support 
PAHM enthusiastically. 
Kimberley Wong felt the City's support of PAHM was vital to the success of the 
project.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
Karen Holman believed the least the City could do was support rehabilitation 
of the space dedicated for the City archives.   
Steve Player remarked that donors were interested in constructing a museum 
with the City's support.   
Sergio Mello reiterated the importance of the City's support in fundraising 
efforts.   
Council Member Kniss noted the building was in poor condition.  After 20 
years, funds were insufficient for construction.   
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth 
to: 
A. 
Approve allocation of $65,000 from the FY 2020 City Council 
Contingency account to the Sea Scouts/Environmental Volunteers, 
consistent with direction provided by Council on December 17, 2018; 
and 
B. 
Authorize the City Manager to negotiate and execute an agreement with 
Sea Scouts/Environmental Volunteers for use of the $65,000 in 
dedicated funding from the City Council Contingency account. 
Council Member Cormack requested an explanation of the allocation to the 
Sea Scouts/Environmental Volunteers. 
Mr. Ramberg explained that in 2018 the Council directed Staff to allocate the 
funds based on a letter from the Sea Scouts.  The Council direction did not 
prescribe use of the funding.  Staff proposed restricting the use of funds to 
supporting the mission of the Environmental Volunteers.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the Council Contingency Fund balance was 
sufficient to allocate $65,000. 
Mr. Ramberg responded yes. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-0 Kou absent 
Council Member Kniss favored exploration of alternative uses of the building 
because of the condition of the building.   
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to: 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
A. 
Move forward with options for an RFP, including potential rezoning of 
the site;  
B. 
Additionally, include a possible shared space arrangement; and  
C. 
Return to City Council by Monday, May 4, 2020 with these new 
opportunities in order to gauge interest. 
Council Member Kniss related that in 2018 PAHM had raised $1.75 million to 
obtain the City's matching grant of $1.75 million.  However, $1.75 million was 
needed for future fundraising expenses.  She supported preserving the Roth 
Building.   
Council Member Cormack requested the timing for an RFP. 
Kiely Nose, Chief Financial Officer and Director of Administrative Services 
indicated results of the RFP likely would not be available by May, 2020.  Staff 
was able to provide a Status Report in May, 2020. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to amend Motion Part C to state, “Return to City 
Council by May 4, 2020 with a status report.” 
Council Member Cormack did not believe the City alone should fund a project 
given the City's extensive list of capital projects.  The project had been 
muddling along for too long.   
Council Member Filseth noted the funding gap was closer to $5 million.  The 
Council needed to discuss funding the project in its entirety.  A co-sharing 
arrangement between PAHM and the City required the City to fund 
construction.  A lease agreement with a private party was able to contain a 
sunset provision.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion “Refer to the Finance 
Committee discussion of the possibility that the City fund the build-out” (New 
Part D). 
Council Member Kniss inquired about the cost of outfitting a museum in a 
rehabilitated Roth Building. 
Ms. Bajuk replied $8.8 million, and a donor pledged $2 million toward that 
amount.   
Mayor Fine reiterated that Phase 1 was rehabilitation of the building, and 
Phase 2 was construction of a museum.  A reset of the project was appropriate 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
because expenses had been tracking income for 15 years.  He inquired 
whether rezoning the property could affect grants awarded to the project. 
Mr. Ramberg answered yes.   
Vice Mayor DuBois requested the cost of City leases for office space 
Downtown. 
Mr. Ramberg advised that the City paid approximately $370,000 annually for 
office space on Bryant Street and $640,000 annually for the Development 
Center space. 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted buildings the City had renovated and repurposed, 
such as the Art Center, Avenidas' building and the Museum of American 
Heritage.  The Roth Building was dedicated as a park, and the City accepted 
a grant from the County of Santa Clara (County) for the project.   
Mayor Fine clarified that the building had not been dedicated as parkland.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney added that a non-park use of the Roth Building 
would not require a vote of the people.  To satisfy the County grant, the 
Council approved a Resolution that allowed the museum use adjacent to a 
park.  The County was aware that the City had not dedicated the site as 
parkland.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the City would have to return the grand funding. 
Ms. Stump explained that use of the site could require repayment of the grant, 
but the grant amount was only $100,000. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the City paid the matching funds to PAHM. 
Ms. Nose replied no.  Payment of the matching funds was before the Council. 
Vice Mayor DuBois felt true fundraising for a museum began in 2007 when the 
City leased the building to PAHM.  Development of other museums located in 
City-owned buildings was slow, but they were gems for the City.  The Council 
set a fundraising goal for PAHM, and PAHM met the goal.  He believed 
donations would increase once construction began.  The funding gap appeared 
to be approximately $4 million, but the gap would be less if pledges were paid 
in full.  He did not believe the Council should let the Roth Building and a history 
museum crumble.  The City allocated $8.1 million for the Junior Museum and 
Zoo Construction Project.  The City needed a location for its archives.  He 
supported the option to fund a museum, but there did not seem to be Council 
support for that.  He thought Staff should explore shared use of the building.  
The City was spending more than $1 million per year for rent.  Investing that 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
money in a City-owned building and sharing space with PAHM was logical.  He 
was interested in using some of the shared space as a nonprofit space and in 
allowing PAHM to lease some of the space.  He inquired whether the Motion 
contemplated the City or nonprofits sharing space with PAHM. 
Mayor Fine replied yes. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if for-profit entities could share space with PAHM. 
Ms. Shikada advised that the amount of space not occupied by PAHM would 
be a factor in sharing the space with a nonprofit or for-profit entity. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if Part D of the Motion would allow the Finance 
Committee to consider other options to fund reconstruction of the building. 
Council Member Cormack indicated Part D directed the Finance Committee to 
discuss City funding of rehabilitation of the existing building. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested a separate vote for each part of the Motion. 
Mayor Fine bifurcated the Motion into Part A and Parts B-D for the purposes 
of voting. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED: Council Member Kniss moved, seconded 
by Council Member Cormack to: 
A. 
Move forward with options for an RFP, including potential rezoning of 
the site;  
B. 
Additionally, include a possible shared space arrangement;  
C. 
Return to City Council by Monday, May 4, 2020 with a status report; and 
D. 
Refer to the Finance Committee discussion of the possibility that the City 
fund the build-out.  
MOTION PART A PASSED: 5-1 DuBois no, Kou absent 
MOTION PARTS B-D AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-0 Kou absent 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack encouraged Council Members and the community to 
become Block Preparedness Coordinators.  She attended the SRPGo meeting 
and learned that Stanford Research Park offered 23 vanpools and was working 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  03/02/2020 
with the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) to retain express 
buses in Palo Alto.  She was appointed to the Ad Hoc Search Committee as an 
executive director of the San Francisquito Creek Joint Powers Authority. 
Mayor Fine reported the Local Policy Makers Group had received an update 
from the High-Speed Rail Authority.   
Council Member Kniss advised that four Council Members would attend the 
National League of Cities conference the following week.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 9:55 P.M. 
