CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 21 
Special Meeting 
June 1, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date by virtual 
teleconference at 5:03 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Closed Session 
A. 
CONFERENCE WITH LABOR NEGOTIATORS 
City Designated Representatives: City Manager and his Designees 
Pursuant to Merit System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada,  
Rumi Portillo, Molly Stump, Monique Le Conge Ziesenhenne,  
Nick Raisch, Kiely Nose, Gina Roccanova) 
Employee Organizations: Utilities Management and Professional 
Association of Palo Alto (UMPAPA); Service Employees International 
Union, (SEIU) Local 521; Service Employees International Union, (SEIU) 
Local 521, Hourly Unit; Palo Alto Police Officers Association (PAPOA); 
Palo Alto Fire Chiefs’ Association (FCA) and Employee Organization: 
International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF), Local 1319; Palo Alto 
Police Manager’s Association (PAPMA) 
Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6(a). 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to go 
into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:04 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:52 P.M. 
Mayor Fine announced no reportable action. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor Fine announced Agenda Item Number 8 had been removed from the 
Agenda and would be heard at a later date. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, advised that Council Member Questions, Comments 
and Announcements would occur immediately following City Manager 
Comments. 
Oral Communications 
Terry Holzemer urged the Council to read information from the West Bay 
Citizen's Coalition and schedule a discussion of Plan Bay Area 2050. 
Beth Rosenthal agreed that the Council needed to schedule a discussion of 
Plan Bay Area 2050.  The public must be informed and allowed to provide 
input.   
Andie Reed related that the Council needed to influence the methodology that 
resulted in housing requirements.  Residents needed to make their own land 
use decisions.   
Paul Machado remarked that the Metropolitan Transportation Commission 
(MTC) continued to use the jobs model in effect prior to the pandemic.  The 
Council should schedule a discussion of the Plan Bay Area 2050 process as 
soon as possible. 
Suzanne Keehn reiterated the request for a discussion of Plan Bay Area 2050.  
The jobs model should be rethought in light of COVID-19 impacts. 
Greg Schmid shared MTC actions since September 2019.  MTC was proceeding 
with an in-house process that would result in unattainable increases in 
Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) requirements.  The Council 
should demand MTC improve the jobs/housing imbalance.   
Miranda Li, Vote 16 Palo Alto, advocated for lowering the voting age to 16 
years.   
Rachel Owens, Vote 16 Palo Alto, supported lowering the voting age to 16 so 
that students could be civically engaged and lifelong voters.   
Antonia Mou, Vote 16 Palo Alto, believed 16 and 17 year-olds should be 
allowed to vote because they were affected by local issues.  Lowering the 
voting age would improve civic engagement and democracy.   
Stacey Olgado supported the pilot program to close streets to non-local traffic 
and encouraged the Council to expand the program in order to support local 
restaurants and businesses. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Stefan Heck asked the Council to open California Avenue and University 
Avenue to outdoor dining and retail for the summer.  Data from Europe 
indicated retail sales would increase with an increase in pedestrian traffic.   
Winter Dellenbach requested the Council honor George Floyd by investigating 
racism and police brutality within the Palo Alto Police Department and 
requiring the Police Chief to provide timely audits.   
Judy Kleinberg advised that a survey of businesses on University and 
California Avenues found extraordinarily high support for partial street 
closures, sidewalk dining, and parklets.  Restaurants should be allowed to 
open in a financially sustainable way.   
Bob Fisk asked the Council to save the 100-year-old buckeye tree on Newell 
Road. 
Jeremy Erman expressed concern about the lack of transparency around 
termination of the City's lease of Cubberley Community Center.  Permanent 
tenants at Cubberley were being evicted while temporary tenants would pay 
higher fees.   
Jennifer Liu encouraged the Council to impose a curfew on the City.   
Jonathan Erman commented that the City should not lease only part of the 
Cubberley theatre.  Dressing rooms and backstage areas would be needed for 
any event held there.   
Lilly Huang asked the Council to impose a curfew on the City.   
Mayor Fine asked the City Manager to ensure the Cubberley Informational 
Report was available on the City website.   
Minutes Approval 
1. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the May 4 and May 18, 2020 City Council 
Meetings.  
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member DuBois to 
approve the Action Minutes for the May 4 and May 18, 2020 City Council 
Meetings.  
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Tanaka registered no votes on Agenda Item Numbers 3, 5, 
6, and 6A. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to approve Agenda Item Numbers 2-6B. 
2. 
Approval of Contract Number C20178122 With Stoloski & Gonzalez, Inc. 
in the Amount of $2,082,178 for the Loma Verde Avenue Trunk Line 
Improvements Project (SD-19000), and the Storm Drainage System 
Replacement and Rehabilitation Project (SD-06101). 
3. 
Approval of Utilities Enterprise Fund Contract Number C20176920 With 
Davey Surgery Tree Company for the 2020 Utility Line Clearance Project 
in an Amount Not-to-Exceed $14,486,057 for a Five-year Term. 
4. 
Approval and Authorization for the City Manager or Designee to Execute 
Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) With the San Francisco 
Foundation and PolicyLink to Accept Placement of a Fellow Under the 
Partnership for the Bay's Challenge Grant Program; Authorization for 
the Mayor to Submit a Technical Assistance Request Letter. 
5. 
Approval and Authorization for the City Manager or Designee to Execute 
a Professional Services Agreement With Magellan Advisors, LLC in a Not-
to-Exceed Amount of $214,236 for Phase 1 of the Fiber Network 
Expansion Plan. 
6. 
Ordinance 5497 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Amending Title 12 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code to Set a 120-day 
Statute of Limitations for Challenges to the City’s Water Service Rates, 
Wastewater Collection and Disposal Rates, Refuse Rates, Storm Water 
Management Fees, and Fiber Licensing Service Rates” (FIRST READING: 
May 18, 2020  PASSED: 6-1 Tanaka no). 
6A. 
Authorize the Early Retirement Incentive Program for Police Officers and 
Fire Fighters. 
6B. 
Council Appointed Officers Committee Recommendation to Reject 
Proposals Received in Response to the Internal Auditor Services Request 
for Proposals (RFP). 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 3, 5, 6, 6A:  6-1 Tanaka 
no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 2 and 4:  7-0 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Council Member Tanaka found the 90-percent increase in the tree trimming 
contract unbelievable.  He suggested Staff obtain new bids for the contract in 
Agenda Item Number 5 because prices had decreased due to the pandemic.  
Implementing a statute of limitations as proposed in Agenda Item Number 6 
was not appropriate at the current time.  He questioned whether the $30,000 
incentive for early retirement would result in any savings.   
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, acknowledged Staff's exhaustive efforts to reduce 
costs contained in contracts presented on the Consent Calendar.  He read a 
message of hope and equity on behalf of Reverend Kaloma Smith, Pastor Paul 
Baines, Police Chief Robert Jonsen, and himself.   
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Mayor Fine grieved for Mr. Floyd, his family, and all others injured by or lost 
to racism and police violence.  Palo Alto would continue to hold its police 
officers to the highest standards and insist they treat all people with dignity 
and respect.   
Vice Mayor DuBois supported the message of hope and expressed sorrow for 
the loss of life in Minneapolis.  The Small Business Grant Program had issued 
$10,000 grants to 50 local companies.  Private donations were needed to fund 
the remaining applications.  Expansion of the fiber network was the first step 
to Palo Alto becoming a Smart City. 
Council Member Tanaka questioned whether a curfew could benefit the City.  
The City needed to be ready for the Public Health Department lifting the 
Shelter-In-Place Order.   
Mayor Fine advised that Staff was preparing an Agenda Item for reopening. 
Council Member Cormack remarked that eliminating racism would take years 
and decades of work. 
Council Member Kniss expressed concern that violence was leading to 
violence.  Protests and violence had happened so fast.  She expressed her 
condolences to the Floyd family. 
Council Member Kou concurred with Council Members' comments.  She asked 
the City Manager or Police Chief Jonsen to reassure the community in light of 
recent protests.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Council Member Filseth appreciated the message of hope and Former 
President Obama's statement that setting society's values was the 
responsibility of States and cities.   
Robert Jonsen, Police Chief, expressed sorrow for the Floyd family.  The 
tragedy in Minneapolis was unacceptable.  The country was failing to address 
core systemic problems.  He expressed concern for the welfare of thousands 
of 
law 
enforcement 
officers 
who 
served 
their 
communities 
with 
professionalism and respect and were being attacked for defending protestors 
and property.  Citizens needed a safe space to voice their frustration and anger 
peacefully.  Law enforcement agencies were being targeted by protestors and 
were trying to maintain the peace for non-violent protestors.  Responding to 
civil disturbances was complex and required a fine balance between providing 
space for protestors and preventing violence and property destruction.  The 
Police Department wanted to ensure citizens could express their opinions 
peacefully and respectfully.  The community was correct to hold the Police 
Department accountable for its actions, but the community should also hold 
itself accountable.  The Palo Alto Police Department would do everything in its 
power to protect citizens and property, to provide a safe space for public 
expression, to hold personnel accountable, and to provide transparency 
designed to enhance public trust.   
Council took a break at 8:16 P.M. and returned at 8:31 P.M. 
7. 
PUBLIC HEARING/QUASI-JUDICIAL: Newell Road Bridge Replacement 
Project [19PLN-00130]: Adoption and Approval of; 1) Resolution 9889 
Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Certifying the 
Final Environmental Impact Report (FEIR) and Adopting Findings, a 
Statement of Overriding Considerations and a Mitigation Monitoring and 
Reporting Program Pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act 
(CEQA) for the Project,” 2) a Record of Land Use Action Approving an 
Architectural Review Application [File 19PLN-00130] for Demolition of a 
Two-way Bridge on Newell Road Between Woodland Avenue in East Palo 
Alto and Edgewood Drive in Palo Alto and Construction of a new Bridge 
Along the Same Alignment That Meets Caltrans Standards for Multi-
modal Access, and 3) Approval of Amendment Number 3 to Contract 
C12142825 With NV5, Inc. to Extend the Term for Design Services for 
Newell Road/San Francisquito Creek Bridge Replacement Project (PE-
12011). 
Council Member Cormack disclosed no communications. 
Vice Mayor DuBois disclosed no communications. 
Council Member Filseth disclosed no communications. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Mayor Fine disclosed no communications. 
Council Member Kniss disclosed no communications. 
Council Member Kou disclosed a meeting with Janie Farn about a year ago, 
but information discussed was included in reports. 
Council Member Tanaka disclosed discussions during his community office 
hours, but information discussed was included in the Staff Report. 
Claire Raybould, Senior Planner, reported the project was replacement of an 
existing two-lane bridge with a two-lane bridge in the same alignment.  The 
new bridge would have shared 10-foot vehicle/bicycle lanes with 4-foot 
shoulders for bicycles and 5-foot sidewalks.  The project would raise the bridge 
and remove abutments.  A portion of Woodland Avenue in East Palo Alto and 
Newell Road in both jurisdictions would be raised.  Striping Option A included 
raised 5-foot sidewalks, a 4-foot striped shoulder for bicycle use, and 10-foot 
sharrows.  Striping Option B included a 9-foot shared pedestrian/bicycle path 
and 10-foot vehicle lanes.  The City's Office of Transportation and East Palo 
Alto's Public Works Department had recommended Option A.   
Michele Jeremias, Senior Engineer, advised that the existing bridge had been 
deemed functionally obsolete.  The California Department of Transportation 
(Caltrans) had agreed to pay up to 88.47 percent of costs, and the Santa Clara 
Valley Water District (Valley Water) had agreed to provide the local matching 
funds.  Community outreach began in 2012 and continued in 2020 with public 
meetings for the Environmental Impact Report (EIR).  The proposed contract 
amendment would extend milestone dates for preparation of construction 
documents and completion of permitting.  The existing bridge had to be 
replaced before flood control improvements could be made upstream of the 
bridge.  The project would improve transportation safety and provide 
multimodal access.   
Ms. Raybould explained that the EIR analyzed a wide range of impacts on the 
human and built environment.  The EIR found that all impacts except for one 
were either less than significant or less than significant with mitigation.  During 
the construction phase only, there would be a significant and unavoidable 
impact to traffic at the East Crescent Drive/University Avenue intersection in 
East Palo Alto.  During construction, traffic would utilize other creek crossings.  
There was no feasible mitigation for the impact because site constraints 
prevented retention of the crossing during construction.  Because of this, the 
Council must adopt a Statement of Overriding Considerations in order to 
approve the project.  The project was integral to reducing flood hazards for 
the City and the region, addressed existing roadway deficiencies, and provided 
multimodal and Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)-compliant access.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Caltrans had provided National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) certification 
for the project.  Next steps included coordination with wildlife/water resource 
agencies for applicable permits, coordination with relevant agencies, and 
procurement of right-of-way easements.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney, reported during Architectural Review Board (ARB) 
review of the project, Board Members remarked regarding their personal 
interests in the project proceeding.  Staff had investigated the possibility of 
conflicts of interests because of these statements and found none.   
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired regarding the age of the existing bridge and the 
expected lifespan of the new bridge. 
Ms. Jeremias stated the existing bridge was built in 1911, and the new bridge's 
lifespan could be 100 or more years as well. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested the length of construction. 
Ms. Jeremias reported work in the creek was allowed between June and 
October only.  Construction outside the creek would take about a year and a 
half.   
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about construction hours. 
Ms. Jeremias indicated construction hours would likely be 9:00 A.M. to 5:00 
P.M. Monday through Friday. 
Ms. Raybould clarified the construction hours as 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. in Palo 
Alto. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about plans to mitigate construction impacts on 
nearby residents. 
Ms. Raybould advised that plans included the use of sound barriers and Tier 4 
equipment and traffic mitigations. 
Ms. Jeremias added that construction logistics plans and notice to residents 
were required.  Staff could close Newell Road on the Palo Alto side and use it 
for staging and storage. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about the easements. 
Ms. Jeremias explained that retaining walls would be located behind the 
sidewalks.  The easements could vary between 15 and 20 feet.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the possibility of constructing a 
protected bike lane to protect cyclists and calm traffic. 
Ms. Raybould related that residents had expressed concern about the width of 
the bridge.  Sharrows complied with Caltrans' standards and reduce the width 
of the bridge as much as possible.   
Council Member Tanaka believed residents were concerned that a wide bridge 
would attract cut-through traffic.   
Ms. Raybould agreed that was the likely motivation for some concerns.  
Another motivation was reducing impacts on the creek, trees, and wildlife.  In 
August 2019, Staff conducted additional studies to determine the number of 
cyclists using the bridge.  The number had increased since construction of the 
bicycle/pedestrian bridge in East Palo Alto but was substantially lower than 
needed to justify construction of a Class 2 bike lane. 
Council Member Kniss asked about detours during construction. 
Ms. Jeremias reported vehicle traffic would be directed to Embarcadero and 
West Bayshore or to University Avenue.  Detours for cyclists would depend on 
their destinations.   
Council Member Kniss believed the neighborhood would be delighted with a 
new bridge.  Residents were concerned about the new bridge attracting traffic.   
Council Member Kou requesting funding information for Alternatives 1 and 2. 
Ms. Jeremias indicated the construction cost estimate for Alternative 2 was 
$9.1, $8.1 million from Caltrans and $1 million from Valley Water.  Alternative 
1 required the installation of nine traffic signals, which would approximately 
$1 million.  Any cost savings from constructing a narrow bridge would be offset 
by the cost of traffic signals.  In addition, traffic signals would need additional 
funding for operation and maintenance.  Alternative 2 was selected because 
it would be a one-time expense.  The cost of maintaining an Alternative 2 
bridge would be minor compared to the cost of operation and maintenance for 
traffic signals.   
Council Member Kou asked if there would be a traffic signal for one resident 
to enter and exit his property. 
Ms. Jeremias replied yes. 
Council Member Kou asked if Staff would approach Caltrans for additional 
funding. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Ms. Jeremias explained the overall project cost of $10-$10.5 million.  $9.1 
million was the construction cost. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether salary costs were included in the cost. 
Ms. Jeremias indicated Palo Alto's contribution to the project had been 
oversight of the project.  The costs did not include salary.  Staff would spend 
more time on the project once construction began. 
Council Member Kou requested future project information include the cost and 
number of hours for Staff time.  She inquired whether the City of East Palo 
Alto was providing any oversight or Staff time. 
Ms. Jeremias answered no. 
Council Member Kou requested the flow capacity for San Francisquito Creek 
once the new bridge was constructed. 
Ms. Jeremias related that the flow capacity would increase to 7,500 cubic feet 
per second (CFS). 
Council Member Kou asked if the new bridge would improve the City's Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) rating or reduce flood insurance 
rates. 
Ms. Jeremias advised that the project on its own would not reduce flood 
insurance rates.  Improvements at each crossing of San Francisquito Creek 
together would improve the City's FEMA rating.   
Council Member Kou asked if eight trees would be removed and replaced. 
Ms. Jeremias responded yes. 
Council Member Kou inquired about drainage with the new bridge being higher 
than the existing bridge. 
Ms. Jeremias explained that drainage would be managed within the public 
right-of-way.  Raising the road would direct runoff to Edgewood.  The design 
phase would analyze drainage and propose any needed improvements for 
drainage. 
Brad Eggleston, Director of Public Works, clarified that Alternative 1 would not 
be eligible for Caltrans funding.  If Alternative 1 was selected, Staff would 
have to seek alternative funding sources.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Council Member Kou asked if the width of the bridge in Alternative 1 did not 
comply with Caltrans standards. 
Ms. Jeremias indicated Caltrans' standards required 10-foot lanes with 4-foot 
shoulders.  The 4-foot shoulders would be the bicycle lane. 
Public Hearing opened at 9:14 P.M. 
Paul Gumina, representative of the homeowner at 1499 Edgewood Drive, 
opposed certification of the Final Environmental Impact Report (FEIR) because 
it failed to adequately address all severe impacts.  The construction staging 
area would be located on his client's property.  The Statement of Overriding 
Considerations and the mitigation plan were inadequate and did not comply 
with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The EIR had not 
considered impacts of the COVID-19 emergency.   
Xenia Hammer stated the project was vital for flood control and urged the 
Council to approve it.   
Pamela Wagner expressed concern about increased traffic if Alternative 2 was 
constructed.  Alternative 1 would meet flooding and traffic needs.   
Ben Ball recommended the Council support Alternative 1.  Alternative 2 would 
increase traffic by 2-5 percent from 2020 to 2040.  Residents believed the 
increase was materially understated.   
Hamilton Hitchings shared reasons for selecting Alternative 2 and 
recommended the Council approve it. 
Meg Waite Clayton noted middle schoolers biked to school on Newell Road.  
Alternative 2 would increase the number of speeding cars and put children at 
risk.  She supported Alternative 1. 
Jamie Rappaport supported Alternative 1 because it would not increase traffic.  
The traffic analysis did not address the likely effect of a wider bridge on traffic.  
The difference in costs for Alternatives 1 and 2 was negligible.  The cost for 
traffic signals was insignificant compared to the project cost.   
Rebecca Young did not support a two-lane, large arterial for the sake of traffic 
mitigation and at the expense of children's safety.  Alternative 1 met all needs.   
Steve Young understood the neighbors did not want more traffic.  Both 
alternatives solved flooding problems.  The cost of Alternative 1 should be less 
than stated.  The neighborhood seemed to support Alternative 1.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Karen Hickey supported Alternative 1 because it would reduce traffic and 
improve bicycle safety. 
Deepa Chatergi supported Alternative 1 due to concerns about increased 
traffic on Newell.  If Alternative 1 was not acceptable to Caltrans and the City 
of East Palo Alto, Staff should search for alternative funding rather than default 
to Alternative 2. 
David Yen stated the existing bridge was not wide enough for two cars to drive 
across it at the same time.  A new bridge would be wider than the existing 
bridge.  He urged the Council to approve Alternative 1 because it had a traffic 
flow pattern more in line with the existing bridge.  He questioned the rationale 
for installing a traffic signal at one residential property. 
Bob Fisk preferred to retain the existing bridge.  If that was not possible, he 
could support the alternative that saved the 100-year-old buckeye tree. 
Norman Beamer indicated any further delay in building a new bridge was 
unacceptable.  Replacing a two-lane bridge with a somewhat wider two-lane 
bridge would likely not affect traffic.  A one-lane bridge with traffic signals at 
either end was absurd.  He supported Alternative 2.   
Irving Rappaport advised that Janie Farn had submitted a petition signed by 
more than 100 people in support of Alternative 1.  These people were prepared 
to do whatever was necessary to limit the project to reducing flood risk.  
Alternative 1 was the logical choice.   
Angie Ball supported Alternative 1 and reiterated comments in support of 
Alternative 1.  Funds could be found to build Alternative 1.   
Carol M did not want the bridge changed.  If that was not an option, she 
favored Alternative 1.   
Steve Bisset believed the majority of residents wanted to reduce the flood 
risk.  Residents would not object to the City installing speed bumps near the 
bridge.   
Mike North questioned whether Staff had performed its due diligence for 
Alternative 1A.   
David Neequaye expressed discomfort with the existing amount and speed of 
traffic on Newell Road.  He wanted a solution that would not negatively impact 
the residential area, and Alternative 1 was that solution.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Mike Farn, on behalf of Janie Farn, presented a petition with 116 signatures 
in support of Alternative 1.  The neighborhood wanted to reduce flooding and 
increase traffic calming and children's safety.   
Kevin Fisher remarked that a two-lane bridge would not create traffic 
problems.  He urged the Council to proceed with a project to reduce flooding. 
Barry Medoff stated 1,400 lives would be at risk if the City did not fix the 
flooding problem.  There were ways to mitigate traffic.   
Public Hearing closed at 10:10 P.M.  
Council Member Cormack asked if the project was different when the 
environmental analysis began in 2015.   
Mr. Eggleston recalled the project in 2015 proposed a significantly wider 
bridge with an option to align the bridge with Newell Road in East Palo Alto 
and with two creek overlooks.   
Council Member Cormack inquired about the date of East Palo Alto's review of 
the project. 
Mr. Eggleston advised that the City of East Palo Alto would not formally 
approve the project.  Staff for Palo Alto and East Palo Alto were preparing a 
cooperation agreement to define the partnership of the two cities for the 
project. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the project would be complete in mid-2023. 
Ms. Jeremias replied yes, but perhaps closer to the end of 2022. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the report indicated Alternative 1 would 
permanently increase the impact on traffic.   
Ms. Raybould related that Alternative 1 would not result in a significant impact 
under Palo Alto's thresholds; however, it would result in delays of more than 
4 seconds at multiple intersections.  Level of Service (LOS) at intersections 
would fall from LOS A to LOS B or LOS C.  The impacts were not considered 
significant under CEQA standards, but would be permanent. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Caltrans would provide funding for 
Alternative 1. 
Ms. Jeremias replied no.  Caltrans would consider Alternative 1 as functionally 
obsolete. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Council Member Cormack asked if East Palo Alto would partner with the City 
for construction of Alternative 1. 
Ms. Jeremias responded no, based on past conversations with East Palo Alto 
staff.  East Palo Alto staff also did not see the purpose of the traffic signals.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the eight trees referenced earlier were 
protected trees. 
Ms. Raybould answered yes. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about ways the City could honor the 
heritage of the 100 year-old buckeye tree. 
Ms. Jeremias reported Staff had discussed relocating part of the tree to the 
Junior Museum and Zoo and incorporating it into another project.   
Council Member Cormack noted the 1998 San Francisquito Creek flood was a 
70-year flood.  With climate change, more and worse floods were possible.  
The recent Budget hearings had been brutal.  She did not believe funding 
sources, other than Caltrans, were available.  Valley Water would pay a portion 
of the costs, and Valley Water was a part of the community.  The City was 
responsible for keeping its citizens safe and for doing the right thing for its 
neighbors.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the amount of funding that was secure. 
Ms. Jeremias reported Caltrans had approved the design phase but had not 
approved construction.  Caltrans had reviewed cost estimates and was 
awaiting approval of the EIR.  With approval of the EIR, Staff would meet with 
Caltrans to pursue construction funding. 
Council Member Tanaka asked about the consequences for the project if 
Caltrans could not fund it. 
Ms. Jeremias advised that no one would fund the project if the bridge was not 
built to national standards.   
Council Member Tanaka clarified his question as the consequences for the 
project if Caltrans did not have funds for the project due to budget cuts. 
Mr. Eggleston explained that the project would likely be incorporated into the 
broader upstream project, which needed a funding agreement among all 
partners of the San Francisquito Creek Joint Powers Authority (JPA).   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Mr. Shikada indicated the Highway Bridge Program was a funding program 
administered by Caltrans and used a combination of special State and Federal 
funds.  Funding in the Highway Bridge Program could not be allocated for other 
uses. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the funding was guaranteed. 
Mr. Shikada related that it was guaranteed for highway purposes.  The funds 
could not be used for general government purposes. 
Council Member Tanaka asked why East Palo Alto was not sharing in the cost 
of the project. 
Mr. Eggleston clarified that the City was not paying the costs either.  The City 
of Palo Alto was listed as the owner of the bridge in Caltrans documentation.  
The City assumed project management so that it could apply for funding under 
the Highway Bridge Program.   
Council Member Tanaka suggested East Palo Alto should share the cost of Staff 
time and resources.   
Mr. Shikada stated the City assisted East Palo Alto with projects of mutual 
interest whenever possible. 
Council Member Tanaka noted Option B had a raised bike lane, which would 
increase the safety of children biking to school.  He inquired whether Option 
B qualified for the funding. 
Mr. Eggleston replied yes. 
Council Member Tanaka believed Option B would fulfill most residents' goals 
for the project.  He inquired whether Staff had conducted a survey of residents' 
opinions.   
Mr. Eggleston stated Staff had not conducted a survey.  At one point, Staff 
had considered seven or eight alternatives and utilized a screening process 
and community meetings to narrow the alternatives.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if Staff had surveyed regarding Options A and 
B or obtained community input regarding the two options.   
Ms. Jeremias reported Option A and Option B were the results of comments 
provided at Board and Commission meetings.  Staff had discussed the two 
options with East Palo Alto to learn of its preference, and East Palo Alto's Public 
Works Director advised Staff of East Palo Alto's preference for Option A. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Council Member Tanaka noted Option B provided wider lanes for vehicles, 
qualified for funding, reduced flood risk, and protected cyclists.   
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to:  
A. 
Adopt a Resolution certifying an Environmental Impact Report for the 
Newell Road/San Francisquito Creek Bridge Replacement Project, 
making the required findings, and adopting a statement of overriding 
considerations and a Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Plan, all in 
accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA);  
B. 
Approve the Record of Land Use Action approving the proposed 
Architectural Review application based on the findings and subject to 
conditions of approval;  
C. 
Approve and authorize the City Manager or his designee to execute 
Amendment No. 3 to Contract No. C12142825 with NV5, Inc. to update 
the Schedule of Performance and extend the contract time to December 
2021 to complete the design phase of the Project; and 
D. 
Approve Option B Striping.  
Council Member Tanaka reiterated the goals of the project and neighbors' 
concerns.  Option B appeared to be safer than Option A and a good 
compromise.  There could be ways to mitigate some of the traffic issues. 
Council Member Kniss remarked that Option B would be far safer for kids.  
Discussion of replacing the bridge began before the 1998 flood.  The Motion 
moved the project in the right direction. 
Mayor Fine indicated Option B was preferable for a number of reasons.  He 
referred to Page 7 of the Staff Report regarding the City's and East Palo Alto's 
recommendation for Option A.  The bridge was fairly small and did not have 
enormous traffic volumes.  There was merit to integrating bridge striping with 
existing striping in the area.  He inquired about the striping option Staff had 
presented in community meetings. 
Ms. Raybould explained that Option A proposed sharrows because cyclists 
approaching Woodland Avenue would have to merge into the travel lane to 
turn left onto Woodland Avenue. 
Rafael Rius, Lead Traffic Engineer, clarified that the intersection in Option B 
would be awkward for cyclists.  In Option A, cyclists would merge to the center 
of the travel lane to turn left onto Woodland Avenue.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Mayor Fine inquired whether Staff in outreach presented Option A or Option B 
as part of Alternative 2. 
Ms. Jeremias responded Option A. 
Mayor Fine asked if the Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) had 
approved Option A. 
Ms. Raybould reported the PTC had reviewed Option A only.  Staff had 
prepared Option B in response to comments.  After talking with agencies, Staff 
felt Option A was a better design.   
Mayor Fine commented that a traditional treatment was logical for this 
location.   
Vice Mayor DuBois noted the Council had received numerous letters 
supporting both options.  He inquired whether the City could install speed 
bumps if needed in the future. 
Mr. Eggleston reported Staff would conduct a post-construction Traffic Study 
and respond with traffic calming measures if the study revealed issues. 
Vice Mayor DuBois could make the findings for a Statement of Overriding 
Considerations.  Alternative 1 was infeasible because there was no funding for 
it.  An assessment district could fund the project, but it would not be practical.  
He supported Alternative 2 and Striping Option A.  He asked about the 
possibility of aligning the noise mitigation with construction hours. 
Ms. Raybould reported the noise mitigation complied with Caltrans' standards.  
The mitigation also required the project to comply with standards for the city 
in which construction was occurring.  The standards for Palo Alto and East Palo 
Alto were more restrictive than Caltrans' standards, and the project would 
comply with City standards.   
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning and Community Environment, clarified that 
compliance with the City's Noise Ordinance would supersede.   
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about conditions of approval for the project. 
Ms. Raybould advised that conditions of approval were outlined in the Record 
of Land Use Action (ROLUA). 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to ensure construction did not begin at 6:00 A.M. 
as the project was located near residences.  He supported Striping Option A. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Council Member Cormack preferred Striping Option A because more people 
would be aware of a common design.  She inquired whether mixing bicycles 
and pedestrians was a best practice as Option B appeared to do. 
Mr. Rius indicated it was not common.  Option B showed a striped line that 
separated bicycles and pedestrians.   
Council Member Cormack asked if professionals would prefer Option A. 
Mr. Rius explained that Option A followed more standard design practices than 
Option B.   
Council Member Kou inquired about the 2020 and 2040 scenarios used in the 
residential environment analysis.   
Ms. Raybould advised that the analysis looked at increases in traffic over time 
and used traffic modeling and standard increases. 
Council Member Kou asked if those were the growth rates for Palo Alto and 
East Palo Alto. 
Ms. Raybould responded yes. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether Staff expected growth in population, 
housing, and jobs to increase traffic.   
Ms. Raybould clarified that other projects were planned in the vicinity, and 
those projects would increase traffic over time.  The conclusion was the project 
itself would not increase traffic.   
Council Member Kou asked if the air roof would have to be removed. 
Ms. Jeremias related that a condition of approval required installation of a 
temporary air roof from Friday night through the weekend if the permanent 
structure had to be removed.   
Council Member Kou asked if notice had been provided about the air roof. 
Ms. Jeremias indicated Staff was working with a Rabbi to ensure religious 
services continued. 
Council Member Kou requested clarification of the location of the staging area. 
Ms. Jeremias reported the road right-of-way was large enough to 
accommodate storage and staging during construction.  The parcel at 1499 
Edgewood extended to the middle of the creek, but the property owner could 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
not build a structure in the creek.  Construction would encroach into the creek 
area of the backyard.   
Council Member Kou noted the shoulder would not be the bike lane in Striping 
Option B and asked if the sidewalk was wider in Option B. 
Ms. Jeremias related that the shoulder would be raised so that it was 
contiguous to the sidewalk.  The area could be described as a multiuse path. 
Council Member Kou asked if bicycles could share the travel lane.   
Ms. Jeremias indicated Option B did not propose sharrows for the travel lane.   
Mr. Rius explained that a cyclist could share the travel lane if there was no 
bike lane.   
Council Member Filseth inquired about the movement of cyclists at Woodland 
under Option B. 
Mr. Rius related that a cyclist would leave the sidewalk to turn left onto 
Woodland.   
Council Member Filseth described a scenario for Option B of a vehicle turning 
right from Woodland onto Newell and a cyclist turning left from Newell onto 
Woodland and the two potentially colliding.  A collision was much less likely 
under Option A.   
Mr. Rius remarked that there would be markings and signage for cyclists to 
stop.  There could be a collision if a cyclist failed to stop.   
Council Member Filseth requested Staff's opinion of which option was safer for 
bicyclists. 
Mr. Rius advised that both options were safe if cyclists and motorists obeyed 
traffic laws.  Option A offered a traditional layout, with which most people 
were familiar. 
Council Member Filseth inquired about methods to mitigate an increase in 
traffic after construction of the bridge.   
Mr. Rius clarified that saving time was the motivation for cut-through traffic.  
The difference in time savings for the two alternatives was relatively 
negligible.   
Council Member Filseth asked if there were tools to reduce traffic volumes. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
Mr. Rius reported speed mitigation measures would increase the time for a 
motorist to travel through the neighborhood and eliminate the time savings 
for cut-through traffic.   
Ms. Raybould indicated under all the alternatives traffic would increase over 
time with or without the project.   
Council Member Filseth noted a policy issue of keeping traffic on arterial 
streets or allowing it on residential streets.   
Ms. Raybould related that the project would not encourage motorists to travel 
Newell Road over another route. 
Council Member Filseth preferred Striping Option A. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed a separate vote on Part D of the Motion. 
AMENDMENT:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
change Motion Part D to state, “Approve Option A Striping.” 
Council Member Tanaka believed most children bicyclists would ride on the 
sidewalk rather than in the street.  Option A would be difficult for children 
cyclists to navigate.  Option B was the safer option based on his experience 
riding Newell Road.   
Council Member Kou noted residents wanted Option B.   
AMENDMENT PASSED:  5-2 Kou, Tanaka no 
Council Member Tanaka requested the Mayor split the Motion. 
Ms. Stump reported the Council's rules allowed the Mayor to split a Motion if 
there was a request and if the Motion could be split.  The Motion was not 
severable.   
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by 
Council Member Kniss to:  
A. 
Adopt a Resolution certifying an Environmental Impact Report for the 
Newell Road/San Francisquito Creek Bridge Replacement Project, 
making the required findings, and adopting a statement of overriding 
considerations and a Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Plan, all in 
accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA);  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 21 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/01/2020 
B. 
Approve the Record of Land Use Action approving the proposed 
Architectural Review application based on the findings and subject to 
conditions of approval;  
C. 
Approve and authorize the City Manager or his designee to execute 
Amendment No. 3 to Contract No. C12142825 with NV5, Inc. to update 
the Schedule of Performance and extend the contract time to December 
2021 to complete the design phase of the Project; and 
D. 
Approve Option A Striping.  
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
8. 
Discussion and Direction to Staff on Housing Affordability Requirements 
for Projects Proposed Under the Planned Housing Zone (PHZ). THIS 
ITEM HAS BEEN REMOVED FROM THE AGENDA AND WILL BE HEARD AT 
A LATER DATE. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:19 P.M. 
