CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 39 
Special Meeting 
 
November 16, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in Virtual 
Teleconference at 5:03 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None. 
Oral Communications 
 
Margaret Adkins disclosed that she is speaking on behalf of herself and not 
as the Chapter Chair of the Service Employees International Union (SEIU).  
She explained that she has received abuse from a supervisor within City 
Staff and it is City Council’s (Council) job to ensure that the City’s Ethics 
Policy is enforced. 
Rebecca Eisenberg encouraged the Council to follow best practices when it 
comes to City Staff as well as communications among Council Members.  
She requested that Council discuss the correspondence written by Council 
Member Kou regarding a voter initiative and the settlement agreement. 
Minutes Approval 
1. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the November 02, 2020 City Council 
Meeting. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to 
approve the Action Minutes for the November 02, 2020 City Council Meeting.  
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Rebecca Eisenberg stated that the public can address specific Council 
Members if they so choose too.  She disclosed that the contractor for Item 
Number 3 is involved in fraud in the City of San Francisco.  She encouraged 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
the City Council (Council) to seek out a new contractor.  She did not agree 
with having a quasi-judicial item on the Consent Calendar. 
Neva Yarkin affirmed that she did not support segregation and her reason to 
restrict who enters Foothills Parks is solely to protect the park from vandals.   
Council Member Kou and Council Member Tanaka registered no votes on 
Agenda Item Number 7. 
Vice Mayor DuBois and Council Member Tanaka registered no votes on 
Agenda Item Number 3. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 2. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 2-7. 
2. 
Approval 
of 
Construction 
Contract 
Number 
C20177933 
With 
Automated Solutions Group, Inc. in the Amount of $313,417 for the 
Cubberley 
Building 
Management 
Systems 
Project, 
Capital 
Improvement Program Project (CB-19001). 
3. 
Approval of Contract Number C20175026 With JC Decaux San 
Francisco, LLC in the Amount of $1,053,924 for a Five-year Term to 
Provide the Rental and Servicing of two Automatic Public Toilets; and 
Approval of a Fiscal Year 2021 Budget Amendment in the General 
Fund. 
4. 
Resolutions for the Santa Clara County Historical Heritage Grant 
Program: 1) Resolution 9922 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the 
City of Palo Alto Authorizing the Application and Receipt of Grant Funds 
by 
the 
Museum 
of 
American 
Heritage 
(MOAH) 
for 
Roof 
Repair/Replacement at the Williams House (351 Homer Ave);” and     
2) Resolution 9923 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of 
Palo Alto By the City of Palo Alto for the Roth Building (300 Homer 
Ave) Roof and Frescoes Rehabilitation.” 
5. 
Resolution 9924 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto to Establish the Old Palo Alto Residential Preferential Parking 
(RPP) Program as a Continuing Program.” 
6. 
QUASI-JUDICIAL. 2100 El Camino Real/501 Oxford (College Terrace 
Centre) [20PLN-00247]: Approval of a Proposed Grocery Store 
Pursuant to PC Ordinance Number 5069. Environmental Assessment: 
Exempt per California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Section 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
15301 (Existing Facilities). Zoning District: Planned Community     (PC-
5069). 
7. 
Ordinance 5511 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Amending Chapters 9.64 (Regulation of Community Facilities) and 
22.04 (Parks and Recreation Building Use and Regulations) of the Palo 
Alto Municipal Code to Open Foothills Park to the General Public and to 
Amend or Delete Outdated and Duplicative Code Language  (FIRST 
READING:  November 2, 2020 Passed: 5-2 Kou, Tanaka no).” 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 2: 6-1 Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 3: 5-2 DuBois, Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 7:  5-2 Kou, Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 4-6:  7-0 
Council Member Kou announced that it was clear in a presentation that was 
provided by Staff that Palo Alto (City) is not prepared to accommodate more 
visitors in Foothills Park, as well as no funding was available to 
accommodate them.  She strongly opposed the settlement of the lawsuit 
because it would label residents as racist as well as open the door for more 
abusive lawsuits. 
Council Member Tanaka believed that the residents should decide on Agenda 
Item Number 7.  For Agenda Item Number 2 he disclosed that installing a 
new thermostat system in the Cubberley Community Center is not a wise 
plan to do during a time when the budget is tight.  For Agenda Item Number 
3 he did not see the sense in paying for bathrooms when the City is already 
constrained in its budget.  He advised the City to follow the City of San 
Francisco’s policy where they get paid to have public restrooms because they 
require commercial ads to be installed on them. 
Vice Mayor DuBois registered a no vote Agenda Item Number 3. 
Mayor Fine inquired if that was acceptable. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney confirmed yes.  
Vice Mayor DuBois acknowledged that he was not aware of the lawsuits 
against the contractor for Agenda Item Number 3 and he supported Council 
Member Tanaka’s comments.  
MOTION TO RECONSIDER: Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by 
Council Member Kou to reconsider Agenda Item Number 3. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Mayor Fine asked if the Motion to reconsider the vote on that item would still 
have to be pulled with the three votes and scheduled for a time to be 
determined.  
Ms. Stump clarified that the Motion to reconsider is to not approve it but to 
pull it for further action.  
Council Member Filseth announced that he would like to reconsider Agenda 
Item Number 3 as well.  
MOTION PASSED: 6-1 Fine no 
MOTION: Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou, 
third by Council Member Filseth to continue Agenda Item Number 3 to a date 
uncertain. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager confirmed that he would work with Staff to find an 
appropriate date to hear the item.  
City Manager Comments 
 
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager declared that due to an increase in Corona Virus 
(COVID-19) cases, Santa Clara County has moved into the Purple Tier as of 
November 17, 2020.  Activities that can continue under the Purple Tier 
include 
critical 
infrastructure, 
playgrounds, 
outdoor 
recreation, 
and 
gatherings of 3 households maximum.  Under the new restrictions’ bars and 
breweries, offices, museums, zoos, and family entertainment activities are 
closed.  Outdoor only activities include outdoor dining, movie theaters, and 
places of worship.  The next three upcoming testing dates are November 20, 
2020, December 4, 2020, and December 18, 2020.  Free flu shots are 
available at the testing sites and Staff continues to have discussions with 
Santa Clara County on making more testing dates available. Two upcoming 
community meetings are taking place on November 17, 2020.  A discussion 
regarding Uplift Local is scheduled for 5:30 P.M. and then at 7:00 P.M. is the 
virtual public safety community meeting. On November 20, 2020, at 6:00 
P.M. is the virtual tree lighting ceremony and the Magical Bridge Playground 
is to open on November 17, 2020, under specific safety guidelines.  Lastly, 
Boards and Commission recruitment has been extended to November 17, 
2020. 
Council Member Kniss urged Staff to show the map that Santa Clara County 
has provided with the announcement of the county moving back into the 
Purple Tier.  She found it frustrating that San Mateo County is still in the Red 
Tier while the City is forced to move back into the Purple Tier.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Mr. Shikada disclosed that there has been discussion between Santa Clara 
County and the State of California that metro areas should move with other 
metro areas. 
Action Items 
8. 
Direction on the City of Palo Alto’s Race and Equity Work Including:  1) 
Adoption of a Mission Statement; 2) Direction on Police Data 
Collection, Alternative Response Resources, Use of Force Reporting, 
Future 
Labor 
Agreement 
Negotiations; 
3) 
Citywide 
Workforce 
Assessment; and 4) Organization of Future Work. 
Mayor Fine announced that Palo Alto (City) continues to take steps regarding 
systemic racism, particularly within the Police Department.   
Chantal Cotton-Gains, Deputy City Manager acknowledged that the 
presentation is a follow-up presentation from the October 26, 2020 item.   
Steve Guagliardo, Administrative Services Department Principle Analyst 
reported that there has been a lot of work done regarding systemic racism 
within the four Ad Hoc Committees that the Mayor had set up in June of 
2020.  Three Ad Hoc Committees were focused on police matters and one of 
them focused on Citywide Diversity and Inclusion.  Along with the Ad Hoc 
Committees, the Human Relations Commission (HRC) was tasked to follow 
up on 8 Can’t Wait.  Police Policy Section 300 was updated on November 2, 
2020, by City Council (Council) and that reflected the work that the HRC had 
conducted on 8 Can’t Wait.  The Ad Hoc Committees used a framework to 
guide their process.  Community engagement and learning was the first step 
followed by data collection and gap identification.  Staff has moved to the 
next step, policy direction, and has brought forward recommended actions to 
be discussed by Council.  The Ad Hoc Committees identified eight practice 
areas.  Under the Policing Practice area, data collection and trend analysis, 
officer deployment priorities and practices for non-violent calls, officer 
conduct investigation and transparency, and discipline and accountability 
were explored.  Staff predicts that this work will be concluded by the end of 
the year 2020.   Under the Citywide Practices area, hiring and promotions 
which included Board and Commission appointments, Board and Commission 
engagement with race and equity issues, continuous learning and 
improvements, and norms and expectations for conduct were explored.  
Staff predicts this work to extend into the year 2021. On October 26th, 2020, 
Council had listed several areas of interest that warranted continued 
conversations.  Included in those areas of interest is the need to have 
further conversation about the adoption of the mission statement for 
Citywide diversity and inclusion work, engagement on the demographic data 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
collection and reporting by the Police Department, expand the duties of the 
Independent Police Auditor (IPA) beyond the scope of officer-involved 
shootings and taser use, and prepare an annual report on Revised Use of 
Force Investigation which includes de-escalation among several others. 
Ms. Cotton-Gains summarized that Staff’s recommendations include the 
adoption of the Mission Statement, direction on police data collection, 
alternative response resources, Use of Force Reporting, future Labor 
Agreement Negotiations, Citywide Workforce Assessment, and organization 
of future Race and Equity Work beyond 2020.  
Mayor Fine acknowledged the At Places Memo in the Staff Report that 
disclosed the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination 
Against Women (CEDAW) discussion that took place at the Policy and 
Services Committee. 
Jason Miles, ACLU Midpen, appreciated that the Council had received prior 
reform recommendations from American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and 
that ACLU has provided more recommendations for the Council to consider. 
Patricia Pepa, ACLU Midpen, acknowledged the work regarding alternatives 
to public safety, but disclosed that the Psychiatric Emergency Response 
Team (PERT) Team approach did not go far enough.  She encouraged the 
Council to adopt a Crisis Assistance Helping Out On The Streets (CAHOOTS) 
program instead. 
Jeff Conrad, ACLU Midpen, voiced concern that the work that has been done 
regarding police reform will get lost among the Policy and Services 
Committee’s other responsibilities.  He recommended implementing a 
permanent independent Commission whose members focused specifically on 
policing issues. 
William Bennett suggested a task force system that is modeled after the City 
of Oakland’s own Reimaging Public Safety Taskforce. 
Flynn Kelley urged the Council to implement a permanent Committee or 
Task Force. 
Julia Ragno encouraged the Council to adopt all the 8 Can’t Wait policies as 
they are written and requested that the Palo Alto Police Officer Association 
pass more of the recommendations drafted by the HRC. 
Winter Dellenbach disclosed that all the data that has been collected should 
be posted to the Police Department’s public portal for public viewing.  All 
Police Policies that are partially redacted should be un-redacted and posted 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
in their entirety on the police portal.  Also, the updated Police Policy Manual 
should be posted without delay.  She supported the concept of the City 
having a CAHOOTS program and supported expanding the scope of the IPA.  
Kathryn Mendenhall reported that the accusations against the Palo Alto 
Police Department has cost the department to much time and money.   
Lizzie DeKraai read the closing paragraph from the letter that the Social 
Justice Pathway Group from Palo Alto High School had sent to the Council 
regarding the topic.  The letter provided recommendations for Council to 
consider as well as encouraged Council to take swift steps forward with 
police reform. 
Hamilton Hitchings supported the 8 Can’t Wait recommendations as well as 
the Chief of Police moves towards more unarmed community policing.  He 
encouraged Staff and Council to come up with incentives to encourage 
officers to report the use of force.   
Rebecca Eisenberg emphasized that it has taken the City way too long to 
implement CEDAW.  She wanted to see more mental health services 
provided in the City. 
415***056 (Aram James) emphasized that the Council needs to reverse the 
Council decision that was made on December 2, 2019, regarding internal 
police misconduct and the IPA.  
Charlotte disclosed that she disliked everything related to qualified 
immunity.  She suggested using the Unfunded Pension Liability during labor 
negotiations to incentive officers to report misconduct.  
Roberta Alquist wanted to see implemented a police oversight committee 
that is separate from the Policy and Services Committee.  She announced 
her frustration on the length of time it has taken the City to review the 
CEDAW initiative.  
Angie Evans hoped that the Council would take the opportunity to reverse 
some of the racial injustices that are within the City.  
Council took a break at 6:40 P.M. and returned at 6:53 P.M. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated the specificity and the effort of the 
work.  She believed that the CAHOOTS program did not have to be an 
additional resource, but a substitute.  She did not feel that Item 10, 
rewarding the desired culture in the Police Department and Item 11, 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
reporting out on the Duty to Report situations, were included in the 13 
recommendations presented by Staff.  
Ms. Cotton-Gains answered that Item 11 is reflected in the policy update 
changes that came to the Council on November 2, 2020.  Item 10 is 
reflected in the Diversity Citywide Inclusionary work.  
Council Member Cormack emphasized that she wanted more information on 
the reporting of the Duty to Report. 
Andrew Binder, Assistant Police Chief reported that the Duty to Report is 
now its own specific Duty Manual section so the policy now reflects a Duty to 
Report and a Duty to Intercede.  
Council Member Cormack restated that Council is seeking a report on the 
Duty to Report.  
Robert Jonsen,  Police Chief shared that the interest to have a report on the 
Duty to Report has not been addressed, but the Police Department can 
accommodate that request.  
Council 
Member 
Cormack 
inquired 
if 
the 
performance 
evaluations 
incorporate accommodations and/or complaints from the public and if other 
officers or team members provide input.  
Mr. Jonsen confirmed that the performance evaluations do incorporate all 
three components.  
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to see some of the recommendations be more 
specific in terms of timelines and dates.  He wished to see a separate survey 
for the Police Department from the Citywide survey.  He summarized that 
the City is in the process of redacting nine policies and he wanted to see 
more steps taken towards that.  He did not support changing policies 
annually and wanted to see a process go forward where policies are updated 
as changes are published or in a more frequent period.  He asked if the City 
complies with state law if policies are updated once a year.   
Mr. Jonsen answered that there is no specific requirement under Senate Bill 
978 regarding how frequently a policy needs to be updated on the website.   
Vice Mayor DuBois advised that the policies be updated monthly.  
Council Member Kniss asked what the steps are once a PERT program is in 
place. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Mr. Jonsen answered that a mental health clinician would accompany a 
police officer who is responding to a mental health crisis.  
Council Member Kniss acknowledged the hardship of having a mental health 
professional who is on call and ready to go at a moment's notice.  
Ed Shikada, City Manager explained that the model of the PERT program is 
designed to have a mental/behavior health clinician on duty, not on call, 
with police patrol.  The Mobile Crisis Response Ream (MCRT) program does 
have its phone number and is dispatched independently of the Police 
Department.  Staff has scheduled a meeting with the Health and Human 
Service Department of Santa Clara County to discuss both programs.  
Council Member Kniss expressed that she wanted updates on both programs 
moving forward. 
Council Member Kou confirmed that both PERT and MCRT are Santa Clara 
County programs. 
Mr. Jonsen affirmed that MCRT has its own independent dispatch, but they 
can call the Police Department if there is a safety concern.  Another path is 
the police dispatch receives the call, it is then determined that MCRT would 
be more appropriate for that call and the call is forwarded to MCRT. 
Council Member Kou shared that the number is too long for residents to 
remember.  
Mr. Jonsen concurred and announced that Staff is looking into ways to make 
it more accessible. 
Council Member Kou asked what the similarities are between MCRT and 
CAHOOTS. 
Mr. Jonsen noted that CAHOOTS is broader and it is not just mental health 
calls that they take. MCRT is more mental health-based. 
Ms. Cotton-Gains clarified that the CAHOOTS program does not exist within 
the City and it would be a new initiative.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired what impacts would the recommendations 
make in terms of property and human safety.  
Mr. Jonsen did not foresee any detrimental impacts on the ability to serve 
the community in terms of property and public safety. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Council Member Tanaka asked if City funds are being used for pollical 
statements. 
Mr. Jonsen shared that he has not heard of any plans of a revolt within the 
Police Department. 
Council Member Tanaka mentioned that there are rumors that the work 
environment is hostile.  
Mayor Fine suggested that the Council discuss Recommendation Letter A. 
Vice Mayor DuBois supported the mission statement. 
Council Member Kniss opined that the mission statement is inclusive, far-
reaching, and supported it.   
Council Member Kou concurred that the revised statement is better than the 
first version and supported it.  She wanted to see support put towards Ms. 
Margaret Adkins and her case. 
Mayor Fine moved to Recommendation Letter B. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to know what the timeframe is for 
Recommendation Letter B.  
Mr. Jonsen answered in the fall of 2021. 
Mr. Shikada confirmed that the item will be brought forward to the Council 
on the Consent Calendar within the next month.  
Council Member Kou predicted that the Records Management System needs 
to be in place before any data collection takes place. 
Mr. Jonsen noted that his preference is to focus on getting the system up 
and running instead of data collection.  
Mayor Fine moved to Recommendation Letter C. 
Vice Mayor DuBois clarified that the data will be posted publicly. 
Mr. Jonsen confirmed that is correct and will be reported to the Department 
of Justice immediately once the system is up and running.  
Mayor Fine called for comments regarding Recommendation Letter D. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Council Member Cormack encouraged Staff to work with Santa Clara County 
to rewrite the MCRT Flyer from the perspective of a person who might need 
to call for help.  
Council Member Kniss agreed with Council Member Cormack’s suggestion 
regarding the flyer. 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to know when PERT would be up and operating in 
the City.   
Mr. Jonsen restated that the Police Department is waiting for Santa Clara 
County to assign a clinician to Palo Alto.  
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested that if PERT is not up and running by a certain 
amount of time, then perhaps the City should explore the creation of a 
CAHOOTS program.  
Mayor Fine supported a Motion directing Staff to explore the feasibility and 
possibility of a CAHOOTS line system including cost. 
Vice Mayor DuBois advised to refer to the Policy and Services Committee the 
feasibly study of a CAHOOTS program.   
Mayor Fine wanted to know what the goals are for a CAHOOTS program as 
well as funding possibilities.  
MOTION: Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Mayor Fine that, if the 
County does not assign a resource to Palo Alto in the next six months, refer 
to the Policy and Services Committee the exploration of the feasibility of a 
CAHOOTS-type program. 
Council Member Kou suggested a timeframe of 3-months instead of 6-
months.  
Vice Mayor DuBois believed 6-months to be reasonable.  
Council Member Kou asked if the City can have its own PERTS program as 
well as use Santa Clara County’s program.  
Mr. Shikada disclosed that the City would like to see what can be 
accomplished with the partnership between itself and Santa Clara County 
before perusing an independent model.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Mayor Fine called for comments regarding Recommendation Letter E. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested how long Recommendation Letter E will take. 
Mr. Jonsen answered that the Police Department is already in compliance 
with Senate Bill 1421 and Assembly Bill 748. 
Mayor Fine moved to Recommendation Letter F.  He believed it to be 
appropriate to include all uses of force. 
Council Member Cormack agreed.  She requested that the word applied to 
be changed to a simpler word. 
Mayor Fine suggested used or utilized.  
Mr. Jonsen suggested discharged instead of applied.  
Mr. Shikada noted that the recommendation is talking about firing a firearm, 
not drawing a firearm.   
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to 
direct Staff to return the Scope of Services to allow the City Council to meet 
and confer directly with the Independent Police Auditor.  
Vice Mayor DuBois shared that the Motion is restoring the process in which 
the IPA would report directly to Council in a public session instead of having 
the report go on the Consent Calendar. 
Mayor Fine asked if Staff saw any issue or impacts the Motion may cause. 
Mr. Shikada foresaw no issues. 
Council Member Cormack questioned the language meet and confer. 
Council Member Kou clarified that she wanted the IPA to come before 
Council so that there is a formal presentation in a public setting as well as 
come to Council to receive further direction or more understanding of what 
the problems are.  
Council Member Cormack suggested the IPA meet with Council twice a year 
in public session. 
MOTION RESTATED: Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Vice Mayor 
DuBois to amend the contract to require the Independent Police Auditor 
(IPA) to meet with the City Council in open session twice a year with each 
report. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Council Member Kniss declared that the frequency of twice a year reporting 
is more than other Cities require. 
Mr. Shikada explained that the language pre-dated his time with the City. 
Ms. Stump concurred and she did not know of a time when the IPA had 
presented to the Council.  
Ms. Cotton-Gains noted that the Motion would require an amendment to the 
IPA contract. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked for clarification on if a weapon is drawn, if that is 
considered use of force. 
Mr. Jonsen shared that per policy it is required to be documented. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to 
refer to the Policy and Services Committee consideration of the Independent 
Police Auditor (IPA) oversight of internal complaints regarding misconduct 
related to harassment, discrimination, or retaliation resulting in city 
investigation of uniformed officers.  
Vice Mayor DuBois understood that the cases are being referred to the IPA 
but he wanted to see it be more formal. 
Mr. Shikada foresaw it being difficult to distinguish between harassment and 
a dispute over performance management.  
Ms. Stump concurred with Mr. Shikada and that it is not helpful to get tied 
up with what the City has done before.  
Council Member Cormack suggested the word discipline instead of the word 
investigation. 
Vice Mayor DuBois did not agree with the word discipline. He saw the value 
of the IPA is looking at processes and recommending process improvements.  
By discipline, he predicted that Council Member Cormack meant it would 
filter out potentially spurious issues.  
Council Member Cormack confirmed that is correct. 
Mr. Jonsen explained that the role of the IPA is to review an investigation 
and determine if the discipline was reasonable and appropriate.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Council Member Cormack felt more comfortable setting the bar at discipline. 
Council Member Filseth agreed with Council Member Cormack.  He 
suggested the Ad Hoc Committee or Policy and Services Committee have a 
discussion with the current IPA regarding the topic.  
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed to refer the item to the Policy and Services 
Committee. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1 Fine no 
Mayor Fine reported that there were no comments for Recommendation 
Letter G. He moved to Recommendation Letter H. 
Council Member Kou asked if officers write their incident or use of force 
reports independently, or with the collaboration of others.  
Mr. Jonsen shared that officers are required to write an independent report 
of their experience.  
Mayor Fine called for comments regarding Recommendation Letter I. 
Council Member Cormack requested that Staff bring forward to the Policy 
and Services Committee recommendations as well as things to consider.  
Mayor Fine moved to Recommendation Letter J. 
Council Member Cormack believed it made sense for the Policy and Services 
Committee to review the race and equity components, but she put forth the 
idea that another group should conduct further analysis and provide 
recommendations on the police practice areas.  
Mayor Fine agreed that the Policy and Services Committee is the right body 
to be doing most of the work.  Through the research of his own, he 
discovered that citizen police commissions are not effective. 
Council Member Kniss agreed that the Policy and Services Committee is the 
right Committee to conduct this type of work.  
Council Member Filseth explained that many citizen police commissions did 
not understand what type of authority they have and that is ultimately their 
downfall.  He suggested starting with the Policy and Services Committee and 
then return to the Council if the Committee feels overwhelmed. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Mayor Fine called for comments regarding Recommendation Letter K. He 
asked 
if 
the 
Police 
Management 
Association 
is 
included 
in 
the 
recommendation.  
Mr. Shikada answered yes.  
Mayor Fine moved to Recommendation Letter L.  
Council Member Cormack questioned if pursuing an employee assessment is 
the same thing as conduct an employee assessment.  
Mr. Shikada confirmed that is correct. 
Vice Mayor DuBois announced that he wanted to see a separate assessment 
done around the Police Department culture and workforce. 
Mr. Shikada predicted that the assessment would allow for perspectives by 
departments as well as for the City as a whole.  
Ms. Cotton-Gains added that the other component is the baseline 
demographic information which is different than the assessment itself. 
Vice Mayor DuBois restated that he wanted to understand police culture 
separate from policy.  
Mr. Shikada anticipated the survey would include issues of perceptions and 
attitudes concerning the significance of race and equity within the 
organization as well as how successful the organization is at addressing 
concerns. 
Council Member Kou agreed that a community survey will be identified what 
the problems are.  She noted that it is important to understand the 
relationship between the community and the police. 
Mr. Shikada clarified that he was discussing the workforce survey, but Staff 
can initiate a community survey if the Council directed Staff to do that. 
Mayor Fine asked for comments regarding Recommendation Letter M.  
Council Member Cormack reported that the Policy and Services Committee 
discussed having the CEDAW summit on a Saturday so that people of all 
ages can attend.  The summit could include multiple tracks including health 
and wellness and education.  The panel of speakers could include experts 
and community members of multiple ages. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Council Member Kniss advised Staff to talk to other cities who have a 
CEDAW recommendation before setting up a community summit.  
Council Member Cormack noted that Staff has already reached out to other 
cities and Staff has suggested that the summit follow the City’s Vaping 
Summit model. 
Vice Mayor DuBois advised that Staff work with IT to streamline publishing 
police policy updates to the public website at least monthly.  
Mr. Shikada suggested having a quarterly update.  
MOTION: Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack 
to direct Staff to work with IT to streamline publishing police policy updates 
to the City website on a quarterly basis.  
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
XX to direct the Police Department to include in the Annual Police Report a 
report on Duties to Report.  
Mr. Shikada wanted to know what the report would contain.  
Council Member Cormack explained that the Council and the public are not 
made aware of reports made by police officers who have a Duty to Report. 
Mayor Fine clarified that the report would be a summary of the reports that 
are filed by officers for specific instances.  
Council Member Cormack declared that there is evidence that in a past 
instance police officers did not report a use of force. 
Mr. Jonsen concluded that he did not see how Staff could track such 
situations if officers never report them and that it was not a systemic 
problem within the department. 
Council Member Cormack encouraged the other Council Members to consider 
the idea. 
MOTION WITHDRAWN BY THE MAKER 
Council Member Filseth believed that the idea could be an area that the IPA 
could work on and he concurred that there is not a systemic problem of 
officers not reporting use of force instances. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Council Member Cormack summarized that she wanted to understand how 
officers are required to exercise that duty. She supported Council Member 
Filseth’s proposal that the IPA investigate those instances. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to approve the following actions on a variety of issues:  
A. 
Adoption of the mission statement as a guiding statement of the City’s 
commitment to make equity a foundational principle in the City’s 
operational work;  
B. 
Direct Staff to expedite implementation of the new police records 
management system with quarterly reports to Council, and to return 
with the necessary agreements for the records management system 
allowing for Racial and Identity Profiling Act (RIPA) implementation;  
C. 
Starting after the full implementation of the RMS and the first data 
collection period, direct Staff to resume annual data collection and 
analysis of police contact data similar to the previous Stop Data 
reports;  
D. 
Direct Staff to work with Santa Clara County on implementation of 
participation in the Santa Clara County Psychiatric Emergency 
Response Team (PERT) program and the Mobile Crisis Response Teams 
(MCRT) program and to return to the City Council with any necessary 
agreements for program participation;  
E. 
Direct Staff to develop/update a policy on the timing of records release 
related to investigations that qualify for public disclosure under SB 
1421 and AB 748;  
F. 
Direct Staff to amend and expand the current Independent Police 
Auditor’s (IPA) scope of services to include all administrative use of 
force reports where a baton, chemical agent, TASER, less-lethal 
projectile, canine, or a firearm is used, and all cases where the 
subject’s injuries necessitate any treatment beyond minor medical 
treatment in the field; 
G. 
Direct Staff to maintain an every six (6) months schedule for IPA 
reports to City Council containing reviews ready at the time of the 
report; and for the IPA to provide an audit workplan to the City Council 
for approval; 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
H. 
Direct Staff to include use of force information to the regular 
Supplemental Report submitted to the City Council as a cover 
memorandum to each IPA report; 
I. 
Refer the police reform legislative priority thoughts and input to the 
Policy and Services Committee who will be discussing the City’s 
legislative priorities in December 2020; 
J. 
Refer all race and equity work to the Policy and Services Committee 
for citywide diversity and inclusion practice areas and policing practice 
areas; 
K. 
Direct Staff to return in the fall of 2021 with parameters, proposals, 
and strategies prior to engaging in Palo Alto Peace Officers’ Association 
negotiations; 
L. 
Direct Staff, in coordination with the City’s overall diversity and 
inclusion efforts, to conduct a workforce demographic assessment as 
baseline information and to pursue an employee assessment to 
measure City workforce culture;  
M. 
Policy and Services Committee CEDAW recommendation: Direct Staff 
to proceed with a community summit on gender equity issues and next 
steps in Palo Alto;  
N. 
If the County does not assign a resource to Palo Alto in the next six 
months, refer to Policy and Services Committee the exploration of the 
feasibility of a CAHOOTS-type program; 
O. 
Amend the contract to require the Independent Police Auditor (IPA) to 
meet with the City Council in open session twice a year with each 
report;  
P. 
Refer to the Policy and Services Committee consideration of the 
Independent Police Auditor (IPA) oversight of internal complaints 
regarding misconduct related to harassment, discrimination, or 
retaliation resulting in city investigation of uniformed officers; and  
Q. 
Direct Staff to work with IT to streamline publishing Police Policy 
Updates to the City website on a quarterly basis. 
Mayor Fine announced that the Ad Hoc Committees will be dissolved in a 
future Council meeting. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Council took a break at 8:37 P.M. and returned at 8:46 P.M. 
9. 
PUBLIC HEARING / QUASI-JUDICIAL / LEGISLATIVE. 788 San Antonio 
Road [19PLN-00079]: The City Council Will Consider: 1) Adoption of a 
Resolution 9925 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Certifying a Final Environmental Impact Report (EIR), Making 
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Findings Including a 
Statement of Overriding Considerations, and Adopting a Mitigation 
Monitoring and Reporting Plan;” 2) Adoption of a Resolution 9926 
Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Amending 
the Comprehensive Plan;” 3) Adoption of a Zoning Ordinance: a) 
Expanding the Housing Incentive Program to San Antonio Road, and b) 
Amending Definition of Gross Floor Area and Amending Retail 
Preservation for Housing; 4) Approval of a Tentative Map for a 
Condominium Subdivision; 5) Approval of a Variance to a Special 
Setback; and 6) Approval of Major Architectural Review for 102 
Dwelling Units, a 1,800 Square Foot Commercial Space and two 
Basement Levels of Parking (Continued From November 9, 2020). 
Mayor Fine called for disclosures. 
Council Member Cormack noted that she had received a generic email from 
the applicant and there was new information obtained by the email.  
Vice Mayor DuBois received the same email as Council Member Cormack.  
Mayor Fine reported that in July of 2020 he had a phone conversation with 
the applicant where the applicant disclosed frustration about the pace at 
which the project was moving through the system.  
Council Member Kniss disclosed she has talked with the applicant and visited 
the site more than once.  
Council Member Kou concurred that she had received an email from the 
applicant.  
Council Member Tanaka confirmed he had received an email as well from the 
applicant.  
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Community Environment Director presented the 
item to the City Council (Council).  He disclosed that one action before the 
Council is an applicant driven request to change the zoning of the subject 
property at the corner of Leghorn Street and San Antonio Road.  The other 
item is a Staff recommendation that would extend the Housing Incentive 
Program (HIP) to the area between Middlefield Road and East Charleston 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Road. 
 
Both 
recommended 
actions 
have 
been 
evaluated 
in 
the 
Environmental Impact Report (EIR).  The Council had pre-screened the 
project in October of 2018 and May of 2019.  The project was seen by the 
Planning and Transportation Commission in September of 2019 and August 
of 2019 as well as the Architectural Review Board in August of 2019 and 
January and August of 2020.  The project is located on the border of Palo 
Alto (City) and the City of Mountain View.  The project requests that two 
properties be merged into one to provide 102-dwelling units and 1,803-
square feet of commercial retail space on the ground floor.  The project is 
proposed to be 50-feet in height and has a Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of 2.0.  
The project would include 16-dwelling units of affordable housing.   To 
implement the project, various entitlements are being requested and require 
approval from Council.  The first is a Comprehensive Plan Amendment to 
amend Program L2.4.1 to increase, not eliminate, housing sites along San 
Antonio Road between Middlefield Road and East Charleston Road.  There 
are various Zoning Text Amendments to extend and apply the HIP to the 
property which would allow a 2.0 FAR and up to 50-feet in height,  amend 
the definition of Gross Floor Area (GFA) to exclude equipment rooms that 
are located below grade as well as amend retail preservation requirements 
for CS districts Citywide.  The Architectural Review Board had a unanimous 
recommendation of approval.  The Planning and Transportation Commission 
supported the project with a 6-1 vote with support for a Transportation 
Demand 
Management 
(TDM) 
Plan 
and 
consideration 
of 
roadway 
improvements at San Antonio Road and Leghorn Street.  The Planning and 
Transportation Commission also recommended that the Council consider 
creating a corridor plan along San Antonio Road to link up land uses and 
transportation 
issues 
which 
Staff 
supported. 
 
The 
Planning 
and 
Transportation Commission contemplated and recommended approval of the 
Tentative Map and the Variance request.  An EIR was prepared because the 
site does include a structure that is eligible for the California Register of 
Historic Places.  The historic structure is proposed to be demolished which 
requires a Statement of Overriding Consideration from the Council noting 
that the environmental impact caused by the project is outweighed by the 
benefits of the project.  The EIR indicates that there is no transportation 
impact regarding Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT) but the long-term impact of 
extending the HIP to the area resulted in a Level of Service (LOS) impact.  
Ted O’Hanlon, Applicant announced that the project contains four levels 
above grade of housing units with two levels of below-grade parking that 
consists of 126 spaces with no machine-based parking.  Bike parking will be 
located above ground and include 102 long-term spaces as well as 18 short-
term spaces.  Half of the open space requirements is achieved by 3,200-
square feet of courtyard space while the other is achieved with 3,300 square 
feet of the rooftop deck.  Based on the Strategic Economic Study that was 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
drafted in June of 2020, it found that anything above 15 percent for 
Inclusionary Housing would make the project infeasible.  The project would 
contain all rental dwelling units, but a Tentative Map is being requested so at 
a future date the rentals can be sold as condominiums.  The project 
objectives are to serve a range of renters and income levels, encourage 
alternative modes of transportation, and develop housing without the use of 
the State Density Bonus.  
William Riggs, Planning and Transportation Commissioner reported that 
there was broad support for the project from the Planning and 
Transportation Commission.  The Planning and Transportation Commission 
believed that the design was responsive to transportation impacts, that the 
scale and use intensity is appropriate, that the corridor between San Antonio 
Road and Charleston Road would benefit from a corridor plan, and there was 
support for extending the HIP to that area.  
Public Hearing opened at 9:23 P.M  
Gail Price, Board President of Palo Alto Forward, announced that the Board 
had sent a letter to the Council that supported Staff’s recommendations and 
the expansion of the HIP to selected areas along the San Antonio Road 
corridor. 
Keith Bennett with Save Palo Alto’s Ground Water expressed that the group’s 
comments were ignored in the EIR.  The project is in an area that is close to 
a contaminated plume and the project is near a flood zone.  He suggested 
that the Council implement a Condition of Approval that limits dewatering to 
a maximum of 60 gallons per minute. 
Mitch Mankin spoke on behalf of Silicon Valley Home who supported the 
project as well as the expansion of the HIP along San Antonio Road. 
Debbie Mytels disclosed that many of the emissions within the City are from 
gas-powered vehicles coming from outside the City.  She supported the 
project because it provides much-needed housing as well as promotes the 
use of alternative modes of transportation.  
Liz Gardner wanted to know if the jobs that are located within a mile of the 
project are minimum wage or salary jobs.  Also, if the on-site manager’s 
apartment is included in the 16 Inclusionary Housing units, where bike 
parking located and can e-bikes be accommodated in the bike parking.  Also, 
is the outdoor space enough for the Coronavirus (COVID-19) environment 
and if the units sell, will those be available to low incomes. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Boris Nepo is the owner of the Greenhouse II condominiums and he believed 
the project would be beneficial to the neighborhood.  He disclosed that the 
City of Mountain View is proposing to construct a homeless camp right near 
the project. 
312***096 (Richard Hackmann) encouraged the Council to approve the 
project because it will provide more residential housing in the community. 
Rohin Ghosh supported the project and the extension of the HIP in the area. 
Mircea Voskerician appreciated the affordable housing component of 15 
percent for Inclusionary Housing and the expansion of the HIP.  He fully 
supported the project. 
John Kelley commended the applicate on focusing on smaller rental units 
and encouraging alternative modes of transportation for its residents.  He 
appreciated Staff’s proposal of extending the HIP and the corridor plan. 
Carol Scott spoke to the proposed changes in the Comprehensive Plan and 
urged the Council not to amend the Comprehensive Plan, but to remove 
Program L2.4.1 entirely.  She proposed that Council table the proposed 
change to the GFA because it would have implications for the entire City. 
John Petrilla predicted that the project would not be successful unless the 
residents living in the building do not use cars.  The first quarter-mile near 
the site is unsafe to travel by bicycle.  The transit option had too much 
dependence on the Santa Clara County Valley Transportation Authority 
(VTA) and the stations owned by VTA have been moved since the EIR was 
published.  
Kat Wortham expressed support for the project and agreed that San Antonio 
Road is the best place for housing. 
Stephanie MacDonald agreed that the affordable housing component of the 
project is vital for the community.  She liked that the project is transit-
oriented and that the project provides a community benefit of over $12.9 
million with zero City financing. 
Rebecca Eisenberg strongly urged the Council to approve the project and 
approve the zoning changes.  She advised the Council to review City policies 
after the project is approved to help facilitate more projects like it.  She 
acknowledged that the project is located near a contaminated plume and 
urged Council to stop putting affordable housing near toxic areas. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Scott O’Neil disclosed that he is an avid cyclist who often bikes in the area 
the project is being proposed in.  He confirmed that there are many jobs 
located along the Bay Trail and the placement of the project is perfect for 
commuters who use bicycles.  
Charlotte encouraged the Council to approve the project and the proposed 
zoning changes.  She shared that the EIR is very comprehensive. 
Pamela Harter predicted that bicycle and pedestrian safety will deteriorate 
more if the project is constructed.  
Kelsey Banes supported the project.  She pointed out that all the new 
housing sites that are called out in the new Housing Element update are 
along San Antonio Road.  For that reason, she supported the extension of 
the HIP along the corridor and supported the concept of Staff drafting a plan 
for the corridor.  
Alex Melendrez wanted to see the current housing imbalance be addressed 
and believed that the project provides a first step toward solving the 
problem.  
Ester Nigenda disclosed that she is a member of Save Palo Alto’s Ground 
Water.  She reported that there have been no new Geotechnical Reports 
done since the underground parking facility moved to two levels below 
grade.  She requested that a new Geotechnical Report be drafted.  
Angie Evans foresaw the project as being the right thing to do when it comes 
to tackling the housing imbalance and poverty.  
Joan Larabee was concerned that the project relies too heavily on residents 
of the property biking and how that will affect the already dangerous San 
Antonio Road. 
Kueller B concurred that by approving the project and extension of the HIP, 
more homes will have the chance to be built within the City. 
Ryan Globus agreed that the new pedestrian bridge over Highway 101 will 
provide a safer link from the project to nearby jobs.  He supported having 
Staff draft a transportation plan for San Antonio Road. 
Aram James wanted to know what percentage of the houses are going to be 
rented to high tech workers versus service workers and people of color.  He 
advised the Council to discuss that topic before approving the project. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Salim Damerdji supported the project, as well as the extension of the HIP. 
He mentioned that bicycle safety along San Antonio Road needs to be 
improved regardless if the project is approved or not.  
B. Beekman confirmed that the parcels are located on a Superfund site area.  
He supported housing that accommodates 30 to 60 percent of the Average 
Median Income (AMI) for the area.  
Public Hearing closed at 10:20 P.M. 
Peter Baltay, Planning and Transportation Commission Chair shared that the 
proposed project is very good with its intentions, it is a passable design and 
placed in a great location.  The applicant worked very closely with the 
Architectural Review Board and in the end, the Board supported the project. 
Council Member Kniss shared that the project is fascinating, but wanted to 
know more about the bicycle component of the project. 
Mr. O’Hanlon explained that the bike parking contains a standard size, non-
machine apparatus for storing bikes which is located adjacent to the lobby 
on the ground level.  Regarding the suggestion about e-bikes and charging, 
he announced that he will explore that suggestion further.  He noted that the 
average size of the studio apartments is 510-square feet, the average size of 
the one-bedroom units is 650-square feet and the average size for the two-
bedroom units is 1,100-square feet.  
Council Member Kniss requested more information regarding parking for 
cars. 
Mr. O’Hanlon confirmed that the project is fully parked with 126 traditional 
stall-based parking spaces.  The retail space will have 20 spaces of the 126 
allocated to it for their customers to use.  
Council Member Kniss inquired if the project and the extension of the HIP 
should be separated, or discussed together.  
Mayor Fine suggested to separate them.  
Council Member Kniss asked when was the last time the City had approved a 
housing project. 
Mr. Lait confirmed that it has been a while since a large project has been 
approved.  
Council Member Kniss reported that along San Antonio Road in the City of 
Mountain View the buildings are eight to ten stories high and the City of 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Mountain View does have several specific plans for their section of the 
roadway.  She supported having housing along San Antonio Road and that 
there are jobs located within the vicinity of the proposed project that provide 
various hourly wages.  She inquired how many times the Architectural 
Review Board and Planning and Transportation Commission had reviewed 
the project.  
Mr. Lait disclosed that the Architectural Review Board reviewed it three 
times and the Planning and Transportation Commission had a meeting 
regarding the EIR as well as a project meeting.  
Council Member Cormack appreciated the Architectural Review Board’s 
contributions to the project, the incorporation of the chrysanthemum flower 
to pay homage to the historic flower shop, the scriptural numbers in front of 
the building for wayfinding, that the project is fully parked, and rounding up 
to 16 affordable units instead of paying an In-Lieu Fee.  She wanted to know 
if the open space on top of the building is a roof deck or a rooftop garden. 
Mr. Lait summarized that under the HIP, if the rooftop space is open to 
residents of the building then the open space requirement is satisfied. 
Sheldon Au Sing, Planner noted that the rooftop does contain gathering 
spaces. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about the pedestrian ramp and the special 
setback.  
Mr. Lait explained that there will be an American Disability Act (ADA) 
compliant access ramp to the entrance and the ramp will encroach into the 
25-foot special setback.  He mentioned one way to manage any possible 
future issues is the adoption of the proposed Condition of Approval Number 
15 that would require the applicant to modify the ramp if any roadway 
improvements are going to take place.  
Vice Mayor DuBois asked why there was a switch to rental units from 
ownership. 
Mr. O’Hanlon explained that as the number of units grew, the project 
morphed into more of a rental project than an ownership project. 
Vice Mayor DuBois questioned why the square footage of the retail space is 
reduced. 
Mr. Lait noted that the Building Permit history was reviewed and it showed 
that one of the past uses was never established.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to know what the proposed affordability level is.  
Mr. Lait shared that the affordable housing units are deed-restricted to the 
80 to 100 percent AMI with 1/3 restricted to 120 AMI.  
Vice Mayor DuBois pointed out that there were no Conditions of Approval 
that relate to construction hours and he advised Staff to include those. 
Mr. Lait explained that the construction hours are listed in the Municipal 
Code and the project would be subject to those even if they were not listed 
in a Condition of Approval.  
Vice Mayor DuBois rephrased that he wanted to see the project be respectful 
to the residents living across the street during construction.  
Mr. Lait declared that the Municipal Code does require the project to provide 
a Logistic Plan and any construction happening outside of typical hours 
would require a permit.  
Vice Mayor DuBois questioned if any protected trees are going to be 
removed.  
Mr. Lait confirmed that there are 13 protected trees sited to be removed.  
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if there will be a plaque or marker on the site 
referencing the historic resource that is to be demolished. 
Mr. O’Hanlon announced that he would be amenable to including a historic 
plaque on the site.  
Mayor Fine wanted to know if the rentals were sold as condominiums, would 
the affordability restriction live on with that conversion.  
Mr. Lait affirmed that the affordability of the 16-units would continue 
regardless of the units being rental or ownership units.   
Mayor Fine requested more information regarding the San Antonio Road 
Corridor Transportation Plan.  
Mr. Lait shared that there have been internal discussions amongst Staff 
around blending housing redevelopment with transportation improvements 
along the San Antonio Road corridor.  
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official added that there have been 
discussions with VTA about the upcoming projects along San Antonio Road 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
and them providing service along the corridor as well as looking at bicycle 
enhancements in the area.  
Mayor Fine advised Council to discuss a San Antonio Road Corridor 
Transportation Plan soon.  He supported the Retail Preservation Waiver, he 
appreciated the project using the HIP instead of State Density Bonus Law 
and that the project stops at a density level that is similar to California 
Avenue.  He explained that the development is restricted to other City 
regulations and it made sense to allow a Gross Floor Area Waiver for 
parking.  He concluded that the most important message is that the 
applicate will be paying for the affordable units for the lifetime of the deed 
restriction. 
Council Member Tanaka appreciated that the units will be rental units and he 
wanted to see the 16 affordable housing units stay as rentals.  He supported 
the size of the units.  He inquired why the project did not have all studio 
units. 
Mr. O’Hanlon mentioned that it is not impossible to have all studio units, but 
the team wanted the project to have a variety that appeals to more potential 
residents.  
Council Member Tanaka announced that the loss of retail space is 
unfortunate.  
Mr. O’Hanlon explained that it was the Council’s direction to add retail space 
and the space that is provided will activate the corner.  The team’s mission 
is to build as much housing as possible to make the project pencil out.  
Council Member Kou requested more information regarding future roadway 
improvements and the special setback.  
Mr. Lait reiterated that the Record of Land Use Action Number 15 states that 
the applicant shall rearrange the frontage to accommodate any roadway 
improvements.  
Council Member Kniss noted that the building will be in an already vacant 
area.   
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois 
to: 
A. 
Adopt a Resolution certifying the Final Environmental Impact Report, 
adopting California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) findings, a 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 28 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Statement of Overriding Considerations and a Mitigation, Monitoring 
and Reporting Program; 
B. 
Approve the 788 San Antonio Road project, construction hours, and 
the addition of a historical plaque; 
C. 
Adopt a Record of Land Use Action approving the requests for a 
Tentative Map, Variance and Architectural Review based on findings 
and subject to the conditions of approval; 
D. 
To the extent necessary for the project: 
a. Adopt a Resolution amending Comprehensive Plan Land Use 
Element Program L2.4.1;  
b. Introduce an Ordinance approving text amendments to the Palo 
Alto Municipal Code Title 18 
Council Member Kniss affirmed that she is excited about the project and that 
it is important to approve the project so that the City  does not fail subject 
to Senate Bill 35 regulations.  
Vice Mayor DuBois appreciated the applicant’s responsiveness to feedback 
and supported the project. 
Council Member Cormack concurred with Council Member Kniss and Vice 
Mayor DuBois’s comments.  She expressed that she did have concerns 
regarding the bicycle infrastructure. She requested that on Packet Page 171, 
at the bottom, the words “housing crisis” be changed to “housing 
imbalance”.  
Council Member Filseth agreed that extending the HIP makes sense and to 
revisit the area as a potential area for housing.  He declared that market-
rate and below-market-rate are two different things and he urged the 
Council to start thinking of them as separate components.  He wanted to see 
the existing model work with a new model that uses the Affordable Housing 
Fund to invest in increasing the below-market rate (BMR) inclusion rates in 
other market-rate projects. 
Mayor Fine agreed that the City should have one more model.  He 
emphasized that affordable housing units are restricted in the Municipal 
Code to 120 percent of AMI because housing is so expensive in the City.  
Council Member Kou asked if the EIR is being certified just for the project, or 
does the certification cover all the proposed HIP recommendations.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 29 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Mr. Lait concurred that the EIR includes both the project and the HIP 
extension, but that does not mean that the Council is adopting the HIP 
extension if the EIR is certified. 
Council Member Kniss disclosed that she has concerns regarding the 
certification of the EIR when it includes the 16 other properties.  
Council Member Tanaka asked how much studio units cost to rent out.  
Mr. O’Hanlon predicted roughly $2,500, but he emphasized that the market 
has substantially changed and will continue to change until the project is 
fully built.   
Council Member Tanaka reported that the studio units are affordable 
because they are smaller.  He inquired how much the one-bedroom units 
would cost.  
Mr. O’Hanlon predicted the two bedrooms to be roughly $4,000 and $5,000 
a month.  
Council Member Tanaka restated that the smaller units are more desirable 
because they are more affordable and he appreciated that the project 
provides more smaller units than larger units.  He questioned how hard 
would it be to convert the two-bedroom units into studio units.  
Mr. O’Hanlon agreed that smaller units are more affordable, but was not 
prepared to answer the question of how the project would be affected if the 
two-bedroom units were converted to studios.  
Council Member Tanaka asked how the applicant team felt about requiring 
the 16 affordable housing units be forever rental units.  
Mr. O’Hanlon believed that the project should be all ownership or all rentals. 
Council Member Kou inquired if the EIR had only addressed one level of 
underground parking instead of two levels.  
Mr. Lait clarified that the Soils Report had only reviewed one level and 
updated Soil Reports will be provided during the Plan Check Process.  
Council Member Kou articulated that the HIP goes up to 1.5 FAR and the 
project is requesting 2.0 FAR and that 2.0 FAR would extend to all the other 
parcels if approved. 
Mr. Lait explained that the HIP ranges from 1.5 to 3.0 FAR depending on 
where it is in the City.  The proposal is to allow for a 2.0 FAR at the subject 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 30 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
property and the other 16 properties’ FAR will be discussed at a future 
hearing if adopted. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0  
Council Member Kou inquired if a Transportation Management Association 
(TMA) can be placed on the San Antonio Road Corridor.  
Mr. Kamhi disclosed that the TMA is looking to expand and it could expand 
to the San Antonio Road corridor.  
Council Member Kou challenged if future developers or owners could be 
required to invest in the TMA. 
Mr. Kamhi confirmed that it could be written into the Conditions of Approval.  
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the nursery is excluded from the proposed HIP 
area. 
Mr. Lait answered yes. 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to know the definition of residential mixed-use.  
Mr. Lait explained that it could include office space.  The reference to high-
density housing is 30 units per acre. 
Vice Mayor DuBois would support language that said high-density residential 
in the CS Zone rather than waiving it from the retail preservation if it is an 
office project.  
Mr. Lait agreed with that change.  
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to know how the VMT Model is being applied to 
the 16 parcels and how LOS would apply as part of Conditions of Approval.  
Mr. Lait reiterated that LOS is still calculated. 
Karly Kaufman, Rincon Consulting explained that the 788 San Antonio Road 
project as well as the expansion of the HIP could not be screened out of 
doing a VMT analysis.  The City’s VMT estimator was used to look at what 
the estimated home-based VMT per resident would be in various traffic area 
zones which resulted in an average of what could be expected for 
developments in the area.  
Vice Mayor DuBois found the methodology confusing. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 31 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Ms. Kaufman added that the threshold and the goal is to have 15 percent 
below average VMT per resident.  The expansion of the HIP came in below 
that 15 percent.  
Mr. Kamhi clarified that the EIR used VTA’s estimator tool, not the City’s 
estimator tool.  
Council Member Cormack reported that her biggest concern is the integrated 
transit plan and she wanted to know what Staff needed to draft a transit 
plan.  
Mr. Kamhi specified that funding is needed to work on a corridor study and 
the opportunities for bicycle infrastructure would come at the expense of 
parking and/or the new median.  Staff continues to engage with VTA in 
having them restore transit service in the area.  
Council Member Cormack announced that a member of the public suggested 
using a program that is similar to the Charleston Road/ Arastradero Road 
program. 
Council Member Tanaka asked why Staff is looking to amend the GFA 
Exemption.  
Mr. Lait explained that it is a project-specific request and Staff does not 
disagree because the facility is underground and does not add to the 
intensity and bulk of the building.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired what the rationale is for having an 
exclusion for R-E, R-1, R-2, and RMD Zones.  
Mr. Lait pointed out that those zones are listed in the existing language of 
the Municipal Code. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to see the exemption extended to all zones. 
Mayor Fine summarized that there is consensus among the Council that 
housing should be placed on sites where commercial facilities are.  He 
supported the expansion of the HIP along San Antonio Road. 
Council Member Kniss suggested that the future retail occupier in the 788 
San Antonio building be labeled a name that references the history of the 
site. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to direct Staff to return with the parameters for a 
San Antonio Corridor transportation study. (New Part B) 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 32 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Mayor Fine asked if Pavement Condition Funds can be used to pay for the 
study. 
Mr. Kamhi explained that if the Pavement Condition Index is above 72, 
which it is, then it can be used for congestion relief projects. 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to know if future housing projects along the San 
Antonio Road corridor will require separate EIRs and Traffic Analysis.  
Mr. Lait predicted that the 788 San Antonio Road’s EIR will cover the 
adjacent parcels.  The approval of the EIR does not impact the ability of the 
City to impose conditions or mitigation measures on future projects. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about dewatering of the two-block area.  
Mr. Lait noted that the City does have robust protocols for dewatering.   
Vice Mayor DuBois requested stronger language regarding dewatering for 
commercial projects. He believed that the San Antonio Road corridor is not 
the best area for housing and is concerned about having high-density on the 
border.  He desired to continue down the current path of placing housing on 
California Avenue and downtown and he wanted to keep the area zoned for 
light industrial uses.  He requested that the Retail Preservation Waiver be 
limited to residential projects.  
Council Member Cormack shared that she still has concerns about transit.  
She requested clarification on the borders of the program area. 
Mr. Lait noted that the PC Zone across the street could amend their zone, 
but Staff was trying to keep the expansion of the HIP contained to the CS 
Zoned properties.  
Council Member Kou felt that the expansion is placing high-density housing 
along San Antonio Road without any neighborhood planning.  She was 
concerned about the reduction in retail space and she wanted to preserve 
the area for low-density commercial or light industrial.  She did not support 
the expansion of the HIP. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to strike the restriction on underground 
parking.  
Council Member Kniss supported the amendment.  
Mayor Fine asked for clarification.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 33 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Council Member Tanaka restated that the concept is to allow underground 
parking facilities for other residential projects. 
Ms. Stump disclosed that the subject was never agendized. 
Council Member Tanaka requested that Staff explore the concept.   
AMENDMENT: Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to only allow the retail preservation waiver in the CS Zone on San 
Antonio Road for high-density residential. 
Council Member Kniss did not agree to the Amendment. 
Mayor Fine also did not agree with the Amendment.  
Council Member Cormack wanted to know what the objective is of the 
Amendment.   
Mr. Lait explained that it would prevent an applicant from automatically 
getting an exemption, but would not preclude the application from 
requesting a waiver.  
Council Member Cormack rephrased that the Amendment is not preventing a 
development that may include office space. 
Mr. Lait confirmed that is correct. 
Council Member Tanaka believed that the Amendment would eliminate many 
projects and did not support it. 
AMENDMENT FAILED: 3-4 DuBois, Filseth, Kou yes 
AMENDMENT: Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council 
Member XX to direct Staff to explore striking the restriction on underground 
parking.  
AMENDMENT WITHDRAWN BY THE MAKER 
MOTION AS AMENDED: Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Mayor 
Fine to: 
A. 
In order to extend the Housing Incentive Program (HIP) to the two-
block area as defined in the administrative record: 
i. 
Adopt a Resolution amending Comprehensive Plan Land Use 
Element Program L2.4.1;  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 34 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
ii. 
Introduce an Ordinance approving text amendments to the Palo 
Alto Municipal Code Title 18; and  
B. 
Direct Staff to return with the parameters for a San Antonio Corridor 
transportation study 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED: 4-3 DuBois, Filseth, Kou no 
Council took a break at 12:38 A.M. and returned at 12:44 A.M. 
10. 
Update and Discussion on the Regional Housing Needs Allocation 
(RHNA) Process and Direction to Staff Regarding the City's Response 
to the Proposed RHNA Methodology, Including Preparation of a Formal 
Comment Letter (CONTINUED FROM NOVEMBER 9, 2020). 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Community Environment Director reported that 
Staff is seeking feedback from the City Council (Council) on a draft letter 
regarding the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) Methodology.  The 
methodology that was selected focuses on high opportunity areas and 
proximity to jobs.  Palo Alto’s (City) potential allocation is a requirement of 
2,573 very low-income homes, 1,482 low-income homes, 1,673 moderate 
income homes, and 4,330 above-moderate income homes to be built within 
the 6th cycle of RHNA.  The draft letter focused on three principal areas, 
policy areas of concern, procedural areas of concern, and data areas of 
concern.  The letter expressed arguments against the use of the 2050 Plan 
Bay Area baseline and Staff recommended to ABAG that a cap be established 
if the baseline moves forward.  The Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic 
remains a concern and how that will impact the production of housing.  Staff 
requests that Council reach out to other agencies who share the same 
interests as the City to advance the City’s interests.  Staff has sent out five 
letters regarding the allocation, but the letters have not been effective in 
influencing the methodology process.  
Greg Schmid found the RHNA numbers to be overwhelming and felt that 
they are in direct defiance of the State of California’s Code.  The State of 
California Code requires the Association of Bay Area Government (ABAG) to 
explore alternative ways of dealing with the job and housing imbalance 
which they did not do. 
B. Beekman saw hope that Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) 
and the Committee to House the Bay Area (CASA) may have creative ways 
of addressing the RHNA Allocation. 
Mark Mollineaux felt that the allocation is much too low and felt that the City 
is grasping at straws in its arguments against the allocation.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 35 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Rebecca Eisenberg agreed with Mr. Mollineaux’s comments and added that 
the City is the only City that does not tax corporate developments.   
Kelsey Banes did not think that the letter will be helpful.  She believed that 
there are several avenues that the City could follow in terms of funding, but 
the City refuses to go down those paths.  
Charlotte emphasized that the City has failed to build any type of housing in 
the City for years and is frustrated that the Council continues to block 
housing projects. 
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois 
to: 
A. 
Discuss and provide direction to Staff as appropriate on the Regional 
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) process;  
B. 
Direct Staff to submit a comment letter to the Association of Bay Area 
Governments (ABAG) Regional Planning Committee on the proposed 
6th Cycle RHNA methodology; 
C. 
Discuss possible City Council Member engagement with other elected 
officials or representatives regarding the RHNA process to further 
advance the City’s interests; and  
D. 
Provide initial direction to staff on preparation for a possible appeal of 
the RHNA methodology to the state Housing and Community 
Development department in Summer next year. 
Council Member Filseth explained that the discussion is not about how many 
housing units can be built, but about having a useful plan.  The current plan 
as stated is designed to fail and governments should not issue plans that 
cannot be met.  He suggested that Staff reference the Freddie Mac Study 
instead of the Embarcadero Study.  He emphasized three areas that need to 
be made clear.  That the plan is a market-rate plan that does not address 
existing residents who are struggling to stay within the City.  That northern 
California Cities need to start pushing back on the state numbers and that 
the City needs to start looking at all the options that are available to get the 
housing units built.  
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed that the argument is not about the need for 
housing, but that the plan is setting the City up for failure.  The City has a 
history of meeting its housing goal and he argued that the new methodology 
has clear errors.  He suggested that the City start preparing to join the 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 36 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
already on-going lawsuits that have been filed by surrounding Cities against 
ABAG. 
Council Member Kniss asked who is the Embarcadero Institute. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager noted that Staff had requested that Housing and 
Community Development (HCD) and ABAG review the Embarcadero Study, 
and ABAG responded with a desire not to respond.  
Council Member Kniss objected to having the study in the letter. 
AMENDMENT: Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to 
remove references to the Embarcadero Institute from the comment letter. 
(New Part E) 
Council Member Filseth did not accept the Amendment. 
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed with Council Member Filseth. 
Council Member Kniss emphasized that it is not appropriate to use a study 
that is not clear to everyone what the study is, who it comes from, and what 
it is discussing.  
Mayor Fine disclosed that the City has never met its housing goals, that 
aligning with other Cities sounded like offloading the City’s responsibilities, 
and he did not support moving forward with a lawsuit.   He did not support 
the reference in the letter regarding COVID-19 and the criticism of urban 
sprawl.  He was not opposed to a cap but felt that requesting it indicated 
that the City is trying to push its housing allocation onto other Cities.  He 
concluded that the Embarcadero Institute Study is a positional document 
and did not belong in the letter.  
Council Member Kou clarified that the City is on track to building market-rate 
housing but behind in below-market subsidize housing.  She agreed with all 
the comments that were made by Council Member Filseth.  She concluded 
that the exaggerated housing numbers and the growth numbers that are put 
through overcrowding and cost burdening also discriminates against low-
income housing.  She strongly disagreed with Mayor Fine and Council 
Member Kniss’s comments regarding the Embarcadero Institute Study. 
Council Member Filseth supported eliminating the Embarcadero Institute 
Study from the letter and replacing it with the Freddie Mac Study.  He 
shared that crowding is accounted for in the Embarcadero Institute Study. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 37 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Council Member Cormack felt that the RHNA Allocation numbers are 
unrealistic.  She asked if the prior letters that were sent by Staff have been 
successful.  
Mr. Lait reiterated that they have not been successful. 
Council Member Cormack inquired on what basis are the appeals being 
made. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney answered that the Southern California 
jurisdictions are appealing because their cycle starts one year earlier than 
Northern California.  If the City appeals, that would not take place until the 
middle of the year 2021. 
Mr. Lait confirmed that is correct. 
Council Member Cormack asked what components the Cities are appealing.  
Mr. Lait clarified that the Cities are appealing their allocations.  He disclosed 
that the City has appealed its own allocation in prior years. 
Council Member Cormack requested reconciliation from Staff regarding 
Stephan Levy’s assertions regarding the Embarcadero Institute Report. 
Mr. Shikada summarized that there is disagreement about the nature of the 
Embarcadero Institute Study and where the flaws exist.  Staff does not have 
a position on the matter. 
Council Member Cormack did not feel prepared to make a decision on the 
Embarcadero Institute Study and for that reason, she did not feel 
comfortable including the Embarcadero Institute Study in the letter.  
Mr. Lait clarified that the letter does not make an argument one way or the 
other concerning the Embarcadero Institute Study.  The letter askes ABAG to 
engage HCD to see if any details could be used from the Embarcadero 
Institute Study. 
Council Member Kniss disclosed that the enforcement used to build housing 
has changed and become stronger. 
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed that things have changed and for that reason, it is 
the Council’s priority to make sure that the RHNA numbers make sense and 
do not set the City up for failure.  He remembered that there is a deadline 
for when the letter can be submitted. 
Mr. Lait confirmed that ABAG is getting ready to formalize the methodology. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 38 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois is comfortable referring to the Freddie Mac Study instead 
of the Embarcadero Institute Study.  He emphasized that it is important to 
understand the details and viewpoints of the model. 
Mayor Fine remarked that the numbers will never make sense unless the 
City uses its zoning tools to foster housing in the City and the numbers will 
never make sense if the City continues to appeal the RHNA Allocation.  
AMENDMENT PASSED: 4-3 DuBois, Filseth, Kou no 
AMENDMENT: Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
XX to incorporate a reference and footnote to the Freddie Mac report in the 
comment letter.  
Council Member Kniss opposed adding the report because she has not read 
it.  
Council Member Filseth did not accept the Amendment. 
AMENDMENT FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
MOTION AS AMENDED: Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Vice 
Mayor DuBois to: 
A. 
Discuss and provide direction to Staff as appropriate on the Regional 
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) process;  
B. 
Direct Staff to submit a comment letter to the Association of Bay Area 
Governments (ABAG) Regional Planning Committee on the proposed 
6th Cycle RHNA methodology; 
C. 
Discuss possible City Council Member engagement with other elected 
officials or representatives regarding the RHNA process to further 
advance the City’s interests;  
D. 
Provide initial direction to staff on preparation for a possible appeal of 
the RHNA methodology to the state Housing and Community 
Development department in Summer next year; and  
E. 
Remove references to the Embarcadero Institute from the comment 
letter. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-1 Fine no 
 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 39 of 39 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/16/2020 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Mayor Fine requested that residents support small businesses when doing 
their holiday shopping. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated the Office of Emergency’s drill. 
Council Member Kniss declared that the Cities Association named her 
Champion for the year for the work she has done on COVID testing.  
Ed Shikada, City Manager mentioned that on December 4, 2020 at 5:30 P.M. 
is the Cities Association Annual Membership Social.  
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 1:44 A.M. 
 
 
