CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 19 
Special Meeting 
January 21, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers at 6:02 P.M. 
Present:  
Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Study Session 
1. 
Presentation and Review of Utilities Wildfire Mitigation Plan. 
Dean Batchelor, Utilities Director reported a new State law required electric 
utilities to prepare a Wildfire Mitigation Plan (Plan) and to update it annually. 
Debra Lloyd, Acting Assistant Utilities Director advised that Staff presented 
wildfire mitigation strategies to the Council in August 2018, and the Council 
determined an area of the City was at significant risk of a catastrophic wildfire 
caused by electric lines.  The Plan must contain objectives and metrics, 
identify responsible personnel, and adopt preventative strategies and 
protocols for Public Safety Power Shutoffs (PSPS).  Some risk factors for 
wildfires were within Staff's control, and some were not.   
Tom Ting, Engineering Manager indicated Plan objectives were drafted in 
collaboration with City departments.  Staff increased the frequency of 
inspections, corrected any infractions and were exploring more stringent 
maintenance requirements.  PSPS protocols were in place.  A City weather 
station was installed at Montebello Reservoir.  Staff was exploring an 
extension of fiber optic cable to improve communications in the Foothills, 
drafting a scope of work to rebuild the overhead electric line in the Foothills 
and enhancing construction standards for high fire threat areas.  Utilities Staff 
supported the Fire Department's proposal for a controlled burn policy and 
plans.  Plan metrics included no outages caused by overhead electric lines and 
minimal fire impacts due to overhead electric lines.   
Andrew Dressel, Navigant Consulting, Inc. explained that State law required 
local publicly owned utilities to contract with a Qualified Independent 
Evaluator to review and assess the comprehensiveness of the Plan.  Navigant 
Consulting had reviewed the Plan and found it to be comprehensive.  The 
Utilities Department was proactive in implementing best practices.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Council Member Cormack asked if the Utilities Advisory Commission (UAC) 
commented on the Plan. 
Ms. Lloyd responded no. 
Council Member Cormack asked if there were any areas for which Staff was 
not preparing best practices. 
Mr. Dressel indicated Staff had revised the Plan to incorporate Navigant's 
recommendations, and additional recommendations were going to be 
incorporated.   
Council Member Cormack requested comment regarding PSPS protocols. 
Mr. Ting explained that Staff practiced the established processes and outlined 
all communications. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the requirements of Assembly Bill 
(AB) 1054 
Mr. Dressel explained that AB 1054 created a Wildfire Safety Advisory Board 
to promulgate best practices for publicly owned utilities and to review and 
approve Plans for publicly owned utilities.   
Council Member Kou asked if the City's body was housed within the Office of 
Emergency Services (OES) or the Utilities Department. 
Ms. Lloyd clarified that the Wildfire Safety Advisory Board was a statewide 
body. 
Mr. Dressel believed there was some connection between the Wildfire Safety 
Advisory Board and the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC).   
Council Member Kou inquired whether CPUC, the Utilities Department and the 
Fire Department coordinated increased frequency of inspections and 
maintenance.   
Mr. Ting advised that the Utilities Department was responsible for inspections 
and maintenance. 
Council Member Kou requested the current frequency of inspections. 
Mr. Ting replied annually.  Areas not considered high risk were inspected every 
three years.  The high-risk area for Palo Alto was all property west of Highway 
280.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Mr. Dressel noted inspections were performed prior to the beginning of fire 
season in June. 
Council Member Kou asked if rules and responsibilities was implemented. 
Mr. Ting responded yes. 
Council Member Kou asked if Fire Station 8 was manned during fire season 
only. 
Geo Blackshire, Fire Chief related that Fire Station 8 was staffed with two to 
five personnel on red-flag days.  Personnel patrolled the area and coordinated 
with area agencies regarding activities and attendance in Foothills Park.   
Council Member Kou requested the number of Firefighter/Paramedic positions 
in the City and the number on-duty at any given time. 
Chief Blackshire answered 86 total positions and 24 Firefighter/Paramedics on 
duty during a shift.  Not all personnel responded to a fire in the Foothills 
because they had to respond to emergencies in other parts of the City.   
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the process to notify residents in the 
Foothills of an evacuation. 
Chief Blackshire indicated notifications would be issued via Alert SCC, 
Nextdoor, the Police Department's Nixle software and social media platforms.   
Council Member Kou asked if there was a notification system that was not 
dependent on the internet. 
Chief Blackshire answered no. 
Council Member Kou asked if Staff had plans for a backup system. 
Chief Blackshire reported agencies across the County were exploring options. 
Council Member Kou asked if the Division of Urban Forestry mentioned in the 
Plan was the City's Division of Urban Forestry. 
Mr. Ting replied yes. 
Council Member Kou requested the number of personnel in the Urban Forestry 
Division. 
Mr. Ting did not know. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Council Member Kou asked if the Urban Forestry Division inspected trees and 
determined which needed trimming. 
Mr. Ting reported the Urban Forestry Division identified areas needing 
trimming and brought in a contractor to do the trimming.   
Council Member Kou asked if PG&E coordinated its Wildfire Mitigation Plan with 
the Fire Department. 
Ms. Lloyd explained that PG&E routinely communicated with Offices of 
Emergency Services throughout the County.  Utilities Staff met with PG&E 
representatives to discuss communications between PG&E and the Utilities 
Department.  Utilities Staff monitored potential emergency situations and 
PG&E communications but made an independent decision regarding actions to 
be taken in the Foothills.   
Council Member Kou inquired about methods for Staff to learn of PG&E 
decisions. 
Ms. Lloyd clarified that PG&E communicated with agencies through non-public 
means.   
Council Member Kou inquired regarding exercises or drills to test the Plan. 
Ms. Lloyd explained that the Plan focused on actions the Utilities Department 
would take in the event of a wildfire. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager added that the Plan focused on minimizing the risk 
of electric lines igniting a wildfire.   
Council Member Filseth understood the Plan focused on the Utilities 
Department's compliance with State laws and on minimizing the risk of igniting 
wildfires.  He inquired regarding a process to determine the level of risk for 
Foothills residents.   
Ms. Lloyd reported the Plan focused on reducing the risk of equipment causing 
a wildfire.  As a publicly owned utility, the Utilities Department had 
collaborated closely with the Fire Department, OES and the Urban Forestry 
Division.  Utilities Staff also participated in activities of the CPUC and the 
California Energy Commission (CEC).   
Council Member Filseth asked if agencies in surrounding jurisdictions had 
prepared Wildfire Mitigation Plans. 
Ms. Lloyd replied yes.  State laws required all utilities to prepare Wildfire 
Mitigation Plans. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Council Member Filseth reiterated that the Utilities Department had 
determined there was some risk of equipment causing a wildfire in the 
Foothills and developed a Plan.  Next, Navigant evaluated the Plan. 
Council Member Kniss inquired regarding lessons learned from the wildfires in 
Australia. 
Ms. Lloyd reported Staff learned from industry best practices and actions taken 
by other utilities.   
Council Member Kniss suggested the Plan offered good practices but not one 
solution. 
Ms. Lloyd related that Staff had learned from PG&E's communication mistakes. 
Mayor Fine asked if there was an examination of the potential of the City 
reducing service levels to certain areas in the fire zones or prohibiting 
development in the fire zones. 
Mr. Ting answered no. 
Ms. Lloyd clarified that the willingness to implement PSPS protocols could be 
considered a reduction in services.  In response to Council Member Kou's 
question regarding the number of Urban Forestry Staff, the number of Staff is 
not an issue because Staff across the City coordinate their efforts to comply 
with requirements. 
Oral Communications 
Sheryl Klein, Palo Alto Housing suggested the Council consider a height limit 
greater than 50 feet, streamlining the approval process and other tools to 
increase the supply of affordable housing.   
Karen Pauls invited the public to attend the Community Partnership Awards 
on February 6, 2020.   
Melanie Grondel addressed the need for a community grocery in the College 
Terrace neighborhood.  College Terrace Centre's landlord had not contributed 
to the market's success. 
Susan Cole advised that the lack of a grocery in College Terrace Centre was a 
concern for residents of Evergreen Park.  She urged the City to impose fines 
if the market closed. 
Michael Forster remarked that the College Terrace Centre owners had not 
made a good faith effort to support a market.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Rita Vrhel stated Mayor Fine's letter regarding Senate Bill (SB) 50 appeared 
to represent the City of Palo Alto, the Mayor's Office and the City Council, but 
the letter expressed a personal opinion.   
Peter Maresca supported SB 50 and favored multi-unit housing over large 
single-family homes.  He urged the Council to support amended SB 50.   
Kathy Jordan disagreed with comments regarding SB 50.  Electrification of 
Caltrain was not necessarily going to lead to increased train service.   
Aram James felt SB 50 was critical, and a discussion of SB 50 and reparations 
was good.  He requested the Council reexamine the need for Tasers in light of 
evidence that Tasers were far more dangerous than originally thought.   
Per Maresca thanked the Council for supporting the Wilton Court Affordable 
Housing Project.   
Kristen Anderson urged the Council to enforce the $2,000 per day fine for the 
absence of a market in College Terrace Centre. 
Herb Borock did not find a permit for a market at College Terrace Centre.  If 
there was not a legally operated market at the site, every day had to be 
assessed for a fine.   
Mayor Fine requested an approximate date for the Council to receive an 
update regarding College Terrace Centre. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager indicated the Council would discuss an amendment 
to the Fee Schedule on February 10, 2020.   
Action Items 
2. 
Connecting Palo Alto Rail Grade Separation: A) Receive an Update and 
Recommendation From the Expanded Community Advisory Panel 
(XCAP), and Potential Modification of the List of Grade Separation 
Alternatives to add up to Three Concepts (Additional Alternatives for 
Study) at the Churchill, Charleston, and Meadow Grade Crossings; and 
B) Provide Direction to Staff Regarding Next Steps Including a 
Consultant Contract Amendment for Scope, Budget, and Schedule 
Modifications. 
Chantal Cotton Gaines, Assistant to the City Manager reported the Council 
directed the Expanded Community Advisory Panel (XCAP) to provide regular 
updates, to evaluate the seven existing grade separation alternatives, and to 
suggest new alternatives.  The Council received XCAP updates on October 28 
and December 9, 2019.  The cost, timeframe, constructability, and practicality 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
of new alternatives had not been determined.  Should the Council direct Staff 
to proceed with analysis of one, two, or all of the new alternatives, Staff then 
returned to the Council with revisions to the Work Plan and the schedule and 
with contract and budget amendments.   
Nadia Naik, XCAP Chair advised that five of six new alternatives passed an 
initial review.  After discussion, the XCAP recommended three of the five 
alternatives for additional study.  The existing alternatives were not great, and 
the community attempted to provide better alternatives with the six new 
alternatives.   
Keith Reckdahl, XCAP Member indicated six of the seven alternatives required 
relocation of the Caltrain tracks.  He summarized the pros and cons of the 
existing alternatives.  The consulting civil engineers recommended relocating 
roadways because roads were more pliable and subject to less regulatory 
compliance.  Members of the community proposed a constant flow underpass 
for Charleston/Meadow, a partial underpass at Churchill and to rethink 
Embarcadero.  For the constant flow underpass, Charleston had to be 
separated two-way bike/pedestrian lane and traffic lanes that pass beneath 
Alma and the tracks and access Alma.  The same configuration was a 
possibility 
for 
Meadow. 
 
This 
concept 
improved 
traffic 
flow 
and 
bicycle/pedestrian safety and did not utilize shoefly tracks. 
Ms. Naik cautioned Council Members that the renderings were conceptual and 
did not accurately depict the existing conditions. 
Mr. Reckdahl explained that all alternatives had shortcomings.  The goal was 
to find the alternative where the community tolerated the shortcomings.  The 
Churchill partial underpass was to have one lane in each direction at the 
surface.  A separate tunnel for bikes at Seale or Kellogg was needed during 
construction of the underpass.  The Embarcadero concept proposed moving 
the viaduct from Churchill to Embarcadero to improve traffic flow.   
Ms. Naik related that XCAP would be deliberating rapidly in order to meet the 
April 30, 2020 deadline.  Caltrain representatives were going to attend the 
January 29, 2020 XCAP meeting.  An attorney was going to address eminent 
domain at the February 5, 2020 meeting. 
Mayor Fine noted the Council had two At-Places Memos.   
Council Member Filseth requested the reasons XCAP believed a Charleston 
underpass could be built without raising the tracks. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Ms. Naik explained that the 2014 underpass responded to plans for High Speed 
Rail and caused a lot of property damage.  No one understood that the concept 
had more traffic lanes than the existing condition and a very thick rail bridge.   
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official reported the three new concepts 
included aspirational details and were based on currently known information.  
The consultant believed the constant flow underpass would have duration and 
construction impacts, increase traffic through residential neighborhoods, and 
have considerable property impacts.  The partial underpass was likely going 
to require property takings and eliminate traffic movements.  The roundabout 
on Embarcadero was likely to require two traffic lanes.   
Council Member Filseth understood Mr. Kamhi was not certain whether shoefly 
tracks could be eliminated at the Charleston/Meadow crossing. 
Mr. Kamhi indicated foregoing shoefly tracks was not a guarantee at the 
current time. 
Council Member Kou asked if the Stanford roundabout had one or two lanes. 
Mr. Kamhi believed it had two lanes. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether the Churchill concept did not go through 
Alma. 
Ms. Naik answered correct.  The concepts presented to the Council were the 
concepts presented to XCAP.  XCAP had not made any corrections or additions 
to the concepts. 
Council Member Kniss inquired about the ability to depress Charleston 
sufficiently for the concept to be feasible. 
Ms. Naik believed it could be achieved.  The questions were the footprint of 
the depression and the traffic speed.  The concept relied on a very thin rail 
bridge, two traffic lanes, and the bike/pedestrian tunnel.   
Council Member Kniss viewed the San Carlos underpass as unattractive and a 
division in the community.  She suggested the community drive around the 
region to observe the variety of underpasses. 
Council took a break at 8:03 P.M. and returned at 8:11 P.M. 
Michael Chacon, speaking for Mary Chacon, Dexter Girton, Barbara Hazlett, 
Rachel Kellerman, Sara Girton and Tom Kellerman requested a meeting with 
the traffic consultant to discuss the Traffic Study and Plan.  Closing Churchill 
bifurcated Palo Alto, isolated Castilleja residents and significantly impacted 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Embarcadero.  A viaduct at Churchill eliminated residents' privacy and was 
financially untenable.  The Traffic Study needed to look forward 20 years 
rather than ten years.  The road underpass at Churchill improved safety for 
pedestrians and bicyclists.  Westbound traffic on Churchill was not able to turn 
left onto Alma, and traffic on Churchill was not able to travel across Alma.  An 
underpass was going to cost significantly less than a viaduct, it eliminated 
elevation of the University Avenue train station and it did not require eminent 
domain proceedings.  Mr. Chacon shared his revisions regarding the Churchill 
Underpass Concept. 
Michael Price advised that the goals of the Churchill Underpass Concept were 
to eliminate property takings, maintain the location of train tracks and 
significantly improve bicycle/pedestrian safety.  Many of the construction costs 
had already been calculated.   
Young-Jeh Oh supported closure of Churchill Avenue because it would cost 
little and would not preclude future changes.  The Churchill Underpass Concept 
was too complex, cumbersome and costly. 
Elizabeth Alexis commented that the Charleston underpass concept had the 
potential for significant savings in both money and construction time.  The 
concept was worth exploring.   
Eduardo Llach supported closure of Churchill to eliminate through-traffic and 
increase bicycle and pedestrian safety.   
Teri Llach opposed an underpass at Churchill because it would significantly 
increase traffic on Churchill. 
Jason Stinson did not understand the recommendation to evaluate concepts 
for Churchill when closure would be considerably less expensive.   
Jason Matlof related that all seven alternatives would experience improvement 
in traffic on a net basis even with the closure of Churchill.  The matrix of 
criteria needed to be updated. 
David Shen requested the Council update the matrix with new information so 
that alternatives could be assessed accurately. 
Stephen Rosenblum believed closing Churchill would increase traffic on nearby 
streets.  The viaduct concept was going to spread the costs and benefits across 
all neighborhoods. 
Mark Lawrence indicated Churchill was an arterial street and closing it would 
further divide the City.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
David Kennedy related that closing a rail crossing would contradict the goals 
of the Comprehensive Plan.  A good design with some property acquisition 
could reduce construction costs.  The Council needed to direct XCAP to study 
an underpass and a hybrid at Churchill. 
Penny Ellson recommended further study of the constant flow underpass 
concept because it could greatly reduce construction time and generate more 
community consensus. 
Rob Levitsky shared traffic counts he conducted during rush hour that morning 
and the prior Friday at Churchill and Alma.  The Churchill underpass concept 
accommodated most of the traffic on Churchill.  The limitations of the concept 
appeared to be minor. 
Nelson Ng expressed concern regarding the impacts of closing Churchill on 
Embarcadero traffic and property acquisitions. 
Susan Newman requested the Council not close Churchill and review the 
accuracy of the Traffic Study.   
Bob Moss indicated the constant flow underpass at Charleston and Meadow 
was the logical choice.  Closing Churchill significantly impacted traffic 
throughout North Palo Alto.   
Roland Lebrun stated the South Palo Alto tunnel with freight at grade was 
designed to be constructed entirely within the Caltrain right-of-way, which 
eliminated impacts on creeks, Alma, Meadow and Charleston during 
construction.   
Herb Borock reiterated his statements that AECOM had a conflict of interest 
because of contracts with Caltrain and High Speed Rail.  He thought a person 
should not assume an increase in the number of Caltrain trains per hour 
because projections indicated Caltrain would operate at a multimillion-dollar 
deficit in 2040.  Land developers and large employers benefited from grade 
separations, and they should pay for them.   
Jim Silver supported the constant flow underpass concept and hoped the 
Council would study it in detail.   
Mayor Fine reported an XCAP meeting was scheduled for the following day, 
Word on the Street meetings were upcoming and three Town Halls were 
planned for February and March, 2020.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager recognized the complexity of the topic and the 
importance of engaging the community.  Challenges for the Council and the 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
community were: the multiyear process to scope the projects; Staff's ability 
to deliver work product; and regulatory agency approvals. 
Mayor Fine requested cost and time estimates for Council acceptance of one 
of the new concepts for further study. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines indicated the cost estimate for engineering work was 
approximately $65,000 for each concept.  The worst-case scenario for analysis 
of concepts was four months.   
Council Member Kniss favored the Constant Flow Underpass concept for 
Charleston and Meadow because she could visualize the completed project. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to direct Staff to move forward with exploring the “Constant Flow 
Underpass for Charleston and Meadow” concept. 
Council Member Cormack emphasized that the new concepts fixed major flaws 
in the existing alternatives and attempted not to move the railroad.  She 
inquired regarding the number of lanes at the light on Charleston. 
Mr. Kamhi did not know. 
Council Member Cormack expressed concern about the amount of space 
around Meadow for this concept. 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to see the concept with two lanes and one lane in 
each direction, the roundabout in different locations and the bike lane 
crossover at Wilkie Way.  One lane in each direction was more suitable for 
Meadow.  Placing the bike lane on one side of the roadway created space for 
the roundabout.  He suggested the Council explore restrictions to large trucks 
on some of the streets such that truck traffic was directed to larger streets.  
He was pleased to see the number of community members in attendance and 
appreciated the XCAP proposing concepts with reasonable cost estimates.   
Council Member Filseth indicated the promise of this concept was not moving 
the train tracks.  The concept was basically an underpass that allowed access 
to westbound Charleston or Meadow.  The questions for the concept were:  
was it a possibility to be built without moving the tracks; would the roundabout 
fit; would the cost be considerably lower than the hybrid alternative; and was 
it realistic.  He inquired whether study of the concept would answer the 
questions. 
Mr. Shikada replied possibly not.  Based on the consultant's experience, the 
decision not to use shoefly tracks was usually made at a later stage of design. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Council Member Filseth assumed Caltrain would have few concerns with the 
concept because it did not relocate the tracks. 
Mr. Shikada explained that the question was the level of assurance Caltrain 
needed to allow construction under the tracks while trains continued to 
operate. 
Council Member Filseth asked if some insight into the question could be gained 
after a few months of study. 
Mr. Shikada advised that Staff would explore the question and assess risk 
versus reward for the concept. 
Council Member Kou noted the concept would not impact creeks and would 
greatly improve safety for bicycles and pedestrians.  She wanted to see 
professional renderings of the concept at both Charleston and Meadow. 
Mayor Fine agreed that the concept was logical but questioned whether the 
community could embrace the constant flow concept.  The concept relocated 
crossing movements from the grade separation area and into a roundabout.  
The relocation simplified parameters of the design but complicated traffic 
movements.  He expressed concern that drivers may not understand how to 
navigate through and around the underpass.  He inquired regarding the bike 
lane on the south side of Charleston. 
Ms. Naik reported the concept included a bike lane on the west side but not 
the east side of Charleston, and the reverse was proposed for Meadow. 
Mayor Fine felt any shift in the tracks could negatively affect acceptance of 
the concept.  The concept potentially had significant construction impacts and 
shifted more traffic to local neighborhoods.  He inquired whether the concept 
was more functional at Charleston than at Meadow. 
Mr. Kamhi related that AECOM analyzed the concept at Charleston only and 
Charleston was a wider roadway than Meadow. 
Mayor Fine asked if XCAP proposed the concept for both Charleston and 
Meadow. 
Ms. Naik answered yes.  The impacts were different because houses along 
Charleston faced into the circles.  Caltrain was interested in construction 
techniques that did not move the tracks.   
Mayor Fine asked if AECOM would conduct one or two analyses of the concept. 
Mr. Kamhi did not know. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Mayor Fine suggested approving the concept could mean adding two 
alternatives when the goal was to reduce the number of alternatives. 
Mr. Shikada clarified that for purpose of discussion, the concept would be 
considered one alternative.   
Vice Mayor DuBois did not believe the elimination of shoefly tracks was the 
only reason to consider the concept.  The concept minimized changes because 
it did not extend up as the hybrid did.  In addition, the concept reduced noise 
impacts.  He hoped the analysis would provide sufficient information for the 
community to understand the different geometries for Charleston and 
Meadow. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Mr. Shikada reported Staff would work with AECOM to incorporate the concept 
into the Work Plan.  Staff was to work with XCAP to determine the number 
and types of renderings and animations needed for the concept. 
Council Member Kniss requested Staff include Ms. Alexis in design discussions. 
Mayor Fine related that issues around T-intersections and bicycle safety had 
been resolved.  The options for Churchill were extremely limited, but the 
underpass concept was worthy of exploration.  He asked if the roads on either 
side were considered frontage or through roads. 
Ms. Naik replied yes.  Mr. Price's concept included a single lane at grade, but 
AECOM thought it might be two lanes.   
Mayor Fine added that there would be two lanes at grade and one left turn-
lane beneath the tracks.  He asked if trucks could utilize the underpass. 
Mr. Kamhi advised that AECOM had analyzed turning movements for school 
buses and trucks. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to direct 
Staff to move forward with exploring the “Churchill Partial Underpass” 
concept. 
Mayor Fine believed the concept provided a potential hybrid option that 
preserved the most intensive and important traffic movements and removed 
the less used movements.  The concept limited property takings and preserved 
bicycle and pedestrian traffic. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Council Member Kniss was not as enthusiastic about the underpass concept 
because she could not visualize it.  She encouraged Staff and the XCAP to 
provide animations of the concepts.   
Council Member Filseth stated the motivation for considering an alternative 
other than closure of Churchill was the impact on Embarcadero.  He inquired 
whether Staff felt a significant reconstruction of the Embarcadero underpass 
would be necessary in the next 30 years regardless of changes to the Churchill 
crossing.   
Mr. Shikada did not believe Staff had reached that conclusion.  At some point, 
the bridge over Alma needed work.   
Council Member Cormack remarked that the underpass was a clever way to 
mitigate concerns.  AECOM's assessment that the concept would shift more 
traffic to residential streets was a concern.  The creation of a wall, turning left 
prior to the wall and traffic speeds were concerns.  Mr. Reckdahl had 
mentioned moving the bike/pedestrian crossing.  She remarked that signals 
could be tricky.   
Vice Mayor DuBois liked the idea of depressing two lanes on Alma, and the 
signals on Alma could create a residential street.  He continued that bikes 
could bunch at the T-intersection and the bridge over the tracks; therefore, a 
crossing at Seale or removing the bike lane should be analyzed.  He was 
interested in learning whether the concept increased traffic. 
Council Member Kou asked if it was possible to view the concept 
comprehensively, including at Seale and Kellogg. 
Mr. Kamhi advised that the concept could include options for crossings.  There 
was mention of a temporary crossing at Seale so that a crossing would be 
available during construction at Churchill.   
Ms. Naik clarified that the 2014 Rail Corridor Study identified potential new 
bike/pedestrian crossings at Loma Verde, Seale and Kellogg.  XCAP looked at 
two crossings for the closure of Churchill. 
Council Member Kou wanted to view concepts comprehensively and explore 
connectivity.  She proposed amending the Motion to add exploration of east-
west connections at Seale and Kellogg. 
Mayor Fine asked how Staff was considering bicycle connectivity. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Mr. Kamhi reported an update of the Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation 
Plan would be an opportunity to discuss connections.  Bicycle and pedestrian 
connections needed to be considered holistically across the City. 
Council Member Kou requested a timeframe for updating the Bicycle and 
Pedestrian Transportation Plan. 
Mr. Kamhi suggested an update could begin in a year or so. 
Ms. Naik advised that discussion of a crossing at Seale had occurred, but XCAP 
did not know why the crossing was no longer under consideration.  XCAP was 
then given two options for crossings at Churchill only. 
Mayor Fine asked Staff to provide an update of bike connectivity issues at 
Churchill. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Kniss believed the Embarcadero concept would be 
complicated and expensive.  Construction phasing and impacts were 
potentially a fatal flaw for the concept; the concept may not be eligible for 
Measure B funding. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth 
not to re-think Embarcadero at Alma. 
Council Member Kniss indicated the concept seemed to have far more glitches 
than the previous two concepts.  This concept was a practical and appealing 
solution at some future time. 
Council Member Filseth noted the concept was elegant and extremely 
aspirational.  Staff's approach to reconfiguring Embarcadero appeared to be 
workable, but a reconfiguration may not be needed.   
Council Member Kou recalled comments that the Alma overpass was reaching 
the end of its life. 
Mr. Kamhi did not know that the overpass was at the end of its life or whether 
it needed upgrades.  The overpass may be eligible for designation as a historic 
structure. 
Council Member Kou asked if grants were available to upgrade and seismically 
retrofit a historic overpass. 
Mr. Kamhi thought there may be grants. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Council Member Kou inquired whether previous plans for bicycle and 
pedestrian safety improvements in the Emerson, Kingsley and El Camino areas 
were factors in relieving traffic congestion on Embarcadero. 
Mr. Kamhi indicated the Rail Plan was considering mitigations and options for 
bicycle and pedestrian access.   
Vice Mayor DuBois shared concerns about the cost and construction impacts 
of the large roundabout.  Churchill and Embarcadero were related.  He 
requested Staff's thoughts about temporarily closing Churchill. 
Mr. Shikada reported Staff had discussed phasing closure of Churchill.  A 
temporary closure eliminated a bicycle and pedestrian crossing; Embarcadero 
may need modifications prior to a test closure of Churchill.  Staff and AECOM 
were able to develop some options for sequencing work in the area so that 
access and safety were maintained.   
Vice Mayor DuBois requested the plan for Embarcadero.   
Mr. Shikada explained that plans for bicycle infrastructure along Embarcadero 
to El Camino Real were retained in the concept.  Separated bicycle and 
pedestrian crossings conflicted with a second left turn-lane and other 
modifications.  Changes to the bike route on Embarcadero were able to 
proceed.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if changes to Embarcadero would be phased in based 
on decisions about grade crossings.   
Mr. Shikada clarified that changes could wait for grade crossing decisions, but 
they could proceed independent of crossing decisions. 
Vice Mayor DuBois wished to ensure that improvements to Embarcadero were 
considered.   
Council Member Filseth understood the Motion directed no further analysis of 
option 3. 
Council Member Cormack indicated the concept was not navigable for 
bicyclists and pedestrians.   
Council Member Tanaka requested Mr. Carrasco share his vision. 
Tony Carrasco reported a hybrid version included the bridges and additional 
roadways.  The hybrid version worked and was less expensive than the original 
version. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Council Member Tanaka expressed concern that delaying the concept could 
preclude options in the future. 
Mayor Fine concurred with prior comments.  Perhaps the Council was able to 
schedule a Study Session or forum to consider improvements for Embarcadero 
absent grade separation issues. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Mr. Shikada recommended the Council continue Agenda Items concerning the 
Housing Work Plan and the City Auditor due to time constraints.  He thought 
the Council may wish to accept public testimony on the two items. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to 
continue Agenda Item Number 4, “Council Appointed Officers Committee 
Recommendation That Council Discuss …” to February 24, 2020. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Council Member Cormack proposed a record of the decision-making process 
so that members of the community could learn about grade separations and 
participate in community engagement. 
Vice Mayor DuBois remarked that adding two alternatives could extend the 
process past April, 2020.     
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by XXX to ask the XCAP to 
eliminate options. 
Mayor Fine requested XCAP's opinion of accomplishing Vice Mayor DuBois' 
proposal. 
Ms. Naik reported XCAP may need to extend the April 30, 2020 deadline 
because it would need AECOM's analyses of the two new alternatives.  
Theoretically, XCAP was able to reduce the number of alternatives and a few 
weeks later make its final recommendations.  XCAP needed to complete its 
work, deliberate on the alternatives to eliminate and then deliberate on final 
recommendations.   
Mayor Fine interpreted Ms. Naik's response as eliminating alternatives would 
not be possible.  He encouraged XCAP to consider deleting alternatives sooner 
rather than later.   
Vice Mayor DuBois requested XCAP return to the Council with an update of 
choices prior to XCAP's final recommendations. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Ms. Naik asked if the Council would provide some direction with respect to a 
range for costs so that XCAP could factor cost into its decisions. 
Vice Mayor DuBois did not believe the Council would provide that direction any 
time soon. 
Mayor Fine noted cost was a criterium and withdrew his second. 
Mr. Shikada expressed concern about the difficulty of eliminating alternatives 
until the analyses of the new alternatives were complete.  If existing 
alternatives could not be eliminated on their own merits, no decision was to 
be made. 
Ms. Naik clarified that XCAP would have to make its decision in early April, 
2020 in order to write and submit its report by the end of April, 2020.  XCAP 
had to eliminate existing alternatives, review analyses of the new alternatives 
and then determine a final recommendation.  With few meetings and a slow 
process, XCAP had difficulty deliberating fully or submitting a thorough 
recommendation by April 30, 2020. 
Mr. Shikada suggested an XCAP subcommittee apply the criteria to the 
existing alternatives in an attempt to eliminate alternatives.   
Larry Klein urged the Council not to change XCAP's Work Plan.  He did not see 
an advantage in eliminating alternatives. 
Vice Mayor DuBois withdrew his Motion.  Another update from XCAP prior to 
the final recommendation was useful. 
MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND 
Mr. Klein commented that if the upcoming community meetings were to be 
meaningful, the Council should not eliminate alternatives prior to the 
meetings. 
Mr. Shikada noted three Town Halls and Word on the Street sessions in 
February and March, 2020. 
Mayor Fine asked the XCAP to begin stack ranking alternatives when possible.   
Council Member Kou asked if an XCAP meeting with AECOM to discuss the 
Council's comments would be helpful. 
Ms. Naik concurred with more people reviewing the alternatives.  XCAP's 
technical working group or another subcommittee were able to begin 
reviewing alternatives.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  01/21/2020 
Council Member Filseth did not believe eliminating alternatives would be 
productive at the current time. 
Ms. Naik noted the criteria were developed in September 2017, and XCAP was 
going to need some direction regarding the criteria. 
3. 
Update and Discussion of the Planning and Development Services 
Housing Work Plan and Direction to Modify or Direct new Assignments 
Related to Housing and Other Department Assignments. 
Council Member Kniss suggested the Council continue the item to a date in 
the next few weeks. 
Beth Minor, City Clerk reviewed upcoming Agendas and suggested a date of 
March 2, 2020. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth 
to continue Agenda Item Number 3, “Update and Discussion of the Planning 
and Development Services Housing Work Plan …” to a future date. 
Council Member Cormack asked if there were any items within the Work Plan 
that were urgent. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services indicated the Staff Report 
listed the items of concern. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
4. Council Appointed Officers Committee Recommendation That Council 
Discuss and Accept the City Auditor’s Office Organizational Study Report 
and Provide Direction on Next Steps.  
Council Member Kniss announced she was reelected to the Bay Area Air 
Quality Management District Board. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:26 P.M. with a special 
acknowledgement for the continued safety and enhanced quality of life for 
Palo Alto residents. 
