      
CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
1 
 
  
Special Meeting 
June 8, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in a Virtual 
Teleconference at 5:03 P.M. 
Present:  
Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Closed Session 
A. 
CONFERENCE WITH LABOR NEGOTIATORS 
City Designated Representatives: City Manager and his Designees 
Pursuant to Merit System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada, Rumi 
Portillo, Molly Stump, Monique LeConge Ziesenhenne, Nick Raisch, 
Kiely Nose, Gina Roccanova) 
Employee Organizations: Utilities Management and Professional 
Association of Palo Alto (UMPAPA); Service Employees International 
Union, (SEIU) Local 521; Service Employees International Union, 
(SEIU) Local 521, Hourly Unit; Palo Alto Police Officers Association 
(PAPOA); Palo Alto Fire Chiefs’ Association (FCA) and Employee 
Organization: International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF), Local 
1319; Palo Alto Police Manager’s Association (PAPMA) 
Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6(a) 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to go into Closed Session.  
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session a 5:05 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 7:01 P.M. 
Mayor Fine announced no reportable Action.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 2 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
Rail Communications Update 
1. 
Connecting Palo Alto Rail Grade Separation: Receive an Update From 
the Expanded Community Advisory Panel (XCAP). 
Nadia Naik, Expanded Community Advisory Panel (XCAP), Co-Chair reported 
the XCAP decided not to continue discussion of the tunnel alternative and 
was awaiting AECOM's analyses of the new alternatives.  Two members 
resigned from the XCAP.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager advised that utilizing Zoom and discussing the 
new alternatives required some time and flexibility.   
Jason Matloff urged the Council to act as expeditiously as possible.  Return 
on investment (ROI) and cost needed to be the highest priorities for 
selecting an alternative.   
Jason Stinson discussed the traffic on Churchill and challenges for the 
Churchill crossing.  The alternative that was least expensive and resolved 
traffic issues needed to be selected for Churchill.   
Eileen Fagan asked the Council to focus on the long-term ramifications of the 
Churchill crossing.  The number one criterion needed to be safety, traffic 
flow and citizens' use of the space.  The closure and viaduct alternatives 
were not preferred options.   
Susan Newman noted the potential to create silos among various solutions, 
to put pedestrian and bicycle safety in opposition to the smooth flow of car 
traffic, for Staff to work at cross purposes with the XCAP and for the lack of 
representation on the XCAP.   
Teri Llach believed the only option was to close Churchill because it saved 
money, time and lives.   
Lisa Nissim preferred any plan that did not close Churchill to cars, 
pedestrians and bicycles so that Southgate was able to remain a vibrant part 
of the City.  Closing one of the few east-west connections increased traffic 
congestion, pollution and stress.   
Kerry Yarkin felt bicycles and pedestrians should have priority over cars.   
O Hadidi MD MBA suggested proceeding with grade separations may not be 
logical in the post-pandemic world but supported the closure of Churchill 
with a bike and pedestrian underpass.   
Stephen Rosenblum noted closing the Churchill crossing would reduce the 
number of east-west connections and increase traffic on other streets.  The 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 3 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
alternative chosen for Churchill had to serve the needs of the community 
over the needs of a few.  Representatives of Palo Alto Unified School District 
(PAUSD) and the Chamber of Commerce were good candidates to serve on 
the XCAP.   
Eduardo Llach urged the Council to support the Oregon/Embarcadero 
mitigations for the Churchill closure as it was the best solution.   
Karen Kalinsky appreciated the XCAP's consideration of new alternatives for 
the Meadow-Charleston crossing and hoped the XCAP would consider 
different solutions for each street.   
Karen Hohner opposed the closure alternative for Churchill and urged the 
XCAP and Council to consider the partial underpass alternative.   
Neva Yarkin noted the financial impacts of the pandemic on the City, State 
and Caltrain and suggested the City consider only the least expensive 
alternatives.   
Jonathan Erman noted more east-west connections for pedestrians and 
bicycles were needed, particularly in the area between Meadow and 
California.   
Richard Purkey supported the closure alternative for Churchill and the 
recommended traffic mitigations because the alternative would maintain or 
improve traffic flow in this part of Palo Alto and be less costly.   
Rebecca Eisenberg rejected any arguments that indicated the City could not 
afford to protect children and seniors when a Business Tax was not enacted.   
Vice Mayor DuBois felt the community needed to be engaged in Charleston-
Meadow alternatives.  The effects of COVID-19 on Caltrain were unknown 
and needed to be monitored. 
Council Member Cormack indicated Staff and the XCAP should be working 
with PAUSD and Stanford University. 
Mr. Shikada noted representatives from Stanford University had not 
interacted with Staff or the XCAP, but they monitored meetings from time to 
time.   
Council Member Cormack inquired regarding the level of analysis needed to 
ensure the XCAP and Council made good choices regarding pedestrians and 
bicycles. 
Ms. Naik remarked that the hybrid, viaduct and trench alternatives generally 
did not include changes to the bike and pedestrian path.  The closure and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 4 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
new alternatives required significantly more thought about bikes and 
pedestrians.  The XCAP was reaching out to bicycle groups for comment.  
The XCAP focused on vehicles because of the complex engineering needed 
for them, but now the focus was on bikes and pedestrians.  To gain 
community support, there had to be enough visual images to support all 
modes of transit. 
Council Member Cormack felt work had to continue on grade separation 
regardless of crises.   
Council Member Kniss shared Ms. Naik's long history of working on rail 
issues.   
Council Member Tanaka commented that the project would define the City.  
He inquired about ways the Council could facilitate XCAP's work. 
Ms. Naik advised that negotiating in virtual meetings was difficult.  XCAP 
members were serving for several years but were committed to reaching a 
resolution.  Feedback from PAUSD, the business community and Stanford 
University was appreciated.  Staff invited Caltrain representatives to attend 
XCAP's June 2020 meeting.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if XCAP considered funding sources. 
Ms. Naik indicated XCAP had deliberately not discussed funding.   
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official related that Measure B funds were 
a possible funding source.  Staff was monitoring other potential funding 
opportunities.   
Ms. Naik added that funding sources were available for bicycle and 
pedestrian components of grade separation.   
Council Member Kou requested the reason for PAUSD, the business 
community and Stanford University not having representatives on the XCAP. 
Mr. Shikada reported PAUSD and the Chamber of Commerce were involved 
at one time but decided their participation was not appropriate given the 
decision-making process.  Staff was to work with PAUSD to obtain feedback 
on the alternatives. 
Council Member Kou asked if Staff met frequently with the three 
stakeholders to ensure they were engaged. 
Mr. Shikada indicated each would have to determine the appropriate time to 
provide feedback.  At the current time, PAUSD was possibly in a better 
position to provide specific feedback.  Staff was to have direct 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 5 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
communication with the three entities when the alternatives were ready to 
be released to the public in general. 
Mayor Fine concurred with XCAP working on the bicycle and pedestrian 
components of alternatives and obtaining community input regarding South 
Palo Alto crossings. 
Mr. Kamhi reported Staff would return to the Council in two weeks with an 
updated work plan, which included information about the virtual Town Hall 
and an AECOM contract amendment.   
NO ACTION TAKEN  
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor Fine noted Agenda Item Numbers 6 and 7 were continued to June 16, 
2020. 
Oral Communications 
Cari Templeton announced her candidacy for City Council and committed to 
applying her experience to delivering the improvements the City needed.  
Her priorities included implementing inclusion goals across all City programs, 
improving the transportation ecosystem, and encouraging innovation in City 
governance. 
Bill Ross requested the Council conduct a formal review of the June 2, 2020 
Curfew Order.  There was no evidence that linked the curfew with the 
declared emergency.  The Order was not presented to the Council, widely 
communicated or reviewed by the City Attorney.   
Peter Chou concurred with Mr. Ross' comments.  The curfew was undertaken 
without input from elected officials or the public.  The curfew was pretextual, 
escalatory and hostile to the Black Lives Matter movement. 
Kimberley Thacker requested the Council reconsider cuts to the Children's 
Theatre Budget.  The programs benefited youth and replacing the Staff in 
the future was going to be difficult. 
Ian Jacobs noted Children's Theatre continued to operate during COVID-19.  
Budget cuts and Staff reductions were not supposed to be the result of 
uncertainty about the future.   
Amy Brown expressed concerns about Budget cuts for Children's Theatre.  
Staff was needed for virtual programming.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 6 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
Patti Regehr, speaking as an individual urged the Council to reconsider 
reducing the number of Human Relations Commission (HRC) members.  With 
racism and equity protests going on, now was not the time to reduce the 
number of Commissioners.   
Katie Brown concurred with prior comments regarding the Children's Theatre 
and urged the Council to view her video about the positive impacts of 
Children's Theatre.   
Jeremy Erman noted the history of Staff's negotiations regarding Cubberley 
Community Center and inaccuracies in the memorandum presented to the 
Council.  Staff sent eviction notices to tenants without Council approval.  The 
Council needed to reject the lease with Palo Alto Unified School District 
(PAUSD).   
Jonathan Erman believed the previous arrangement with PAUSD regarding 
Cubberley served the community well.  Budget cuts were based on abstract 
projections.   
Kevin agreed with comments regarding the curfew and asked the Council to 
discuss policy for declaring curfews.   
Consent Calendar  
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Mayor Fine, third by 
Council Member Kniss to pull Agenda Item Number 4 to be heard on 
Tuesday, June 16, 2020.   
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 2. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to approve Agenda Item Numbers 2, 3. 
2. 
Approval of Contract Number C20177976 With Granite Construction 
Company in the Amount of $2,006,813 for the Palo Alto Various 
Streets Resurfacing Project (STPL-5100(028)), Capital Improvements 
Program Street Maintenance Project (PE-86070) 
3. 
Adoption of an Ordinance Dissolving the Library Advisory Commission 
by Amending Municipal Code Sections in Chapters 2.08 (Officers and 
Departments), 2.16 (Boards and Commissions Generally), and 2.24 
(Library Advisory Commission)  
4. 
Adoption of Amendments to the City of Palo Alto Tobacco Retailer 
Permit Ordinance (Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter 4.64) to Further 
Restrict Electronic Cigarette Products and Flavored Tobacco Products 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 7 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 2:  6-1 Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 3:  7-0 
Council Member Tanaka remarked that repaving work was necessary, but 
Staff needed to renegotiate the contract for a lower price in light of COVID-
19, Budget cuts and unemployment.  In addition, there were issues with the 
submitted bids and a bid protest. 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager announced the contract in Agenda Item Number 2 
complied with the Public Contract Code and was awarded to the lowest 
responsible bidder.  The Shelter-In-Place Order remained in effect.  The 
County of Santa Clara (County) recommended participants in protests obtain 
Coronavirus testing.  The City's requirement for face coverings remained in 
effect.  Staff was working with the County to bring mobile testing to Palo 
Alto.  Rinconada Pool and dog parks were open.  Effective June 5, 2020, 
outdoor dining was allowed.  The Mitchell Park Cooling Center was open the 
prior week.  If needed over the summer, the Art Center Cooling Center was 
to be open.  Approximately 2,000 people had attended peaceful protests on 
Saturday.  The Council was going to consider Budget adjustments for Fiscal 
Year (FY) 2019-2020 on June 16, 2020 and Budget adoption for FY 2020-
2021 on June 22, 2020.  Additional information regarding police 
accountability was posted to the Police Department's webpage.   
Council Member Kou inquired about the timeframe in which protest 
participants should be tested. 
Mr. Shikada did not recall the County specifying a timeframe. 
Council Member Kniss appreciated the City Manager's and Police Chief's 
actions to implement a curfew.  The lack of looting in Palo Alto was 
fortunate.   
Council took a break at 8:46 P.M. and returned at 8:56 P.M. 
Mr. Shikada clarified that participants in the protest should be tested within 
three to five days.   
Action Items 
4A. 
Resolution 9890 Entitled “Resolution of the Council of the City of 
Palo Alto Expressing Support of the Black Lives Matter Cause.” 
Mayor Fine commended young adults for leading the protest on Saturday 
and Staff and the Police Department for keeping everyone safe.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 8 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
Cairo Mo appreciated and supported the Resolution and called for the 
defunding and eventual dismantling of the Palo Alto Police Department.  The 
community and Council needed to build alternatives to policing. 
Esther Tsvayg supported the Resolution and called for the defunding and 
dismantling of the Palo Alto Police department. 
Laura Sieh commented regarding racism in the Police Department.   
Bella Cooper supported the Resolution and called for the defunding and 
dismantling of the Police Department. 
Ryan Globus urged the Council to adopt the Resolution, to open Foothills 
Park to all and to reform the Police Department with the 8 Can't Wait 
policies.   
David Sacerdote believed the Resolution and 8 Can't Wait policies were not 
sufficient and urged the Council to consider all options to end the Police 
Department's racist practices. 
Samuel Mumford was interested in the Council taking action to curb police 
abuses.   
Xander Koo urged the Council to dismantle the Police Department and to 
invest in educational and social programs for communities of color.   
Sean Chapman commented regarding racism in the Police Department. 
Jordan Bernhardt objected to the implementation of the curfew and urged 
the Council to take action to support the movement Black Lives Matter.   
Sefa Santos-Powell supported the Resolution and called for the defunding 
and dismantling of the Palo Alto Police Department. 
Sarah Goodman concurred with Ms. Santos-Powell's comments. 
Greer Stone, speaking as an individual asked the Council to enact 
meaningful change through the 8 Can't Wait policies 
Cedric de La Beaujardiere encouraged the Council to adopt the 8 Can't Wait 
policies, take the pledge to address Use of Force Policies, join Project Zero, 
and adopt the recommendations of the Task Force on 21st Century Policing.   
Mark Loveland recommended the Council work with the community to 
develop policies for the Police Department and the City release an 
unredacted Police manual. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 9 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
Barbara Shufro supported adoption of the Resolution and meaningful 
reforms including 8 Can't Wait policies. 
Rebecca Eisenberg believed the Council owed the community an apology for 
imposing a curfew.  Police contracts needed to be renegotiated, and 8 Can't 
Wait policies should be implemented.  The City needed a diverse leadership.   
Cari Templeton agreed public safety services needed reform.   
Michel-Ange Siaba shared his hopes for a racism-free community and a 
diverse police force.   
Arushi Gupta supported the Resolution and wanted the Council to commit to 
reviewing public safety practices.  The curfew was a tool to protect private 
property rather than Black lives.   
Emma Raney supported the Resolution and proposed a reallocation of Police 
Department funding to the Community Services Department.  She opposed 
increasing the Police Department's Budget for Fiscal Year (FY) 2020-2021.   
Sunita de Tourreil believed the Resolution was the first step towards a real 
change for the Police Department.  The Police Department needed to 
implement the 8 Can't Wait policies.   
Daniil Andreev concurred with prior comments regarding the Police 
Department and suggested the community hire private security.   
Robert Vetter indicated the community needed to talk about specific Police 
Officers and their racist attitudes and actions.  The Police Department 
needed to be defunded and disbanded when other community safety 
practices had been implemented. 
Jeremy Shaw expressed concerns about racism and welcomed the 
Resolution.  However, Palo Alto needed more police accountability.   
Syd Westley supported the Resolution, but it was not enough.  The Council 
needed to consider the 8 Can't Wait policies.   
Winter Dellenbach commented that the Police manual contained guidelines 
rather than policies.  Systemic racism was built into the Police Department.   
Dorit Goikhman urged the Council to review the collective bargaining 
agreement with the Police Department and 8 Can't Wait policies carefully.   
Hamilton Hitchings suggested the Police Department update their policy 
manual and proposed a Community Advisory Committee recommend policy 
changes.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 10 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
Todd Burke supported Council adoption of the Resolution.  He did not 
understand calls to defund and disband the Police Department. 
Reverend Kaloma Smith suggested the Council control the narrative and 
make changes. 
Council took a break at 10:08 P.M. and returned at 10:15 P.M. 
Mayor Fine wanted to make transformative changes.  The Resolution was the 
first step in evaluating and improving the Police Department.   
Council Member Cormack read a portion of the Resolution into the record. 
Vice Mayor DuBois read a portion of the Resolution into the record. 
Council Member Filseth read a portion of the Resolution into the record. 
Mayor Fine read a portion of the Resolution into the record. 
Council Member Kniss read a portion of the Resolution into the record. 
Council Member Kou read a portion of the Resolution into the record. 
Council Member Tanaka read a portion of the Resolution into the record. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
adopt a Resolution Expressing Support of the Black Lives Matter Movement. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Kniss proposed the Council discuss next steps.   
Council Member Kou hoped the Council would encourage Legislators to 
ensure educational institutions emphasized history in order to spur change.  
The Palo Alto History Museum was a possible agency for change.  She 
discussed housing legislation and transportation policies that discriminated 
based on socioeconomic status.   
Vice Mayor DuBois believed the Palo Alto Police Department served the 
community well.  He invited police union representatives to share their 
feedback and views in an effort to improve the Police Department.  He had 
opposed the curfew and supported the 8 Can't Wait initiative.   
Council Member Cormack was grateful for Police Officers and their service to 
the community.  This was an opportunity to discuss bias and racism 
throughout the community.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 11 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
Council Member Filseth was proud of the community for hosting a peaceful 
protest on Saturday. 
Mayor Fine noted the demonstration was organized by a group of 18-21 year 
olds.   
Council Member Tanaka felt the demonstration was well organized and a 
good show of civic engagement.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager felt this was an incredibly important moment for 
local government.  The Council heard the importance of acting urgently to 
address police use of force issues and of looking for root issues that created 
institutional barriers.  Depending on the Council's discussion, Staff was able 
to 
return 
to 
the 
Council 
the 
following 
week 
with 
some 
initial 
recommendations to address issues.   
Robert Jonsen, Police Chief remarked that Mr. Floyd's death should not have 
occurred.  The police profession had to do better.  The Police Department's 
policies were progressive and aligned with the 8 Can't Wait policies.  He 
regretted not being able to provide police academies for the Council, Boards 
and Commissions.  No police department had a more comprehensive video-
capture system than the Palo Alto Police Department.  Attacking Police 
personnel without in-depth information about the job was not fair.  Police 
personnel were held accountable for their actions.  He had been working 
with the Human Relations Commission (HRC) regarding a review of policies.  
The Police Department was committed to protecting the rights of all people 
within the City.  The Police Department was willing to improve. 
Mr. Shikada reported it was time to examine the circumstances under which 
police officers were sent into situations and look for non-police responses 
where appropriate.   
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to:  
A. 
Direct Staff to return with a framework to review, report on, and 
improve our police policies and practices focused on accountability and 
eliminating any potential incidents of racism or discrimination;  
B. 
Report on possible improvements to police hiring practices; and  
C. 
Begin a diversity and inclusion initiative throughout the City 
Council Member Cormack inquired about a timeframe for Action. 
Mr. Shikada advised that Staff could return with a plan of action at the next 
meeting. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 12 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
Mayor Fine wanted to review frameworks such as 8 Can't Wait, Campaign 
Zero, and former President Obama's Mayors' Pledge, review policies, engage 
the Police Department and union, and determine needed changes.  In the 
past five years, the City had not provided diversity, inclusion, or bias training 
for employees.   
Council Member Cormack wanted the community to participate in creating 
the framework.   
Mr. Shikada agreed. 
Council Member Cormack felt Subpart B was extremely important.  Subpart 
B included the Council and its Boards and Commissions.   
Council Member Kou proposed a citizen’s oversight board participate in 
drafting the framework and report to the Council.  The board was going to 
engage the community rather than Staff.   
Mayor Fine indicated the board could be a new commission, the HRC or the 
Police Chief's advisory group.   
Council Member Cormack suggested the Council discussion of the framework 
include a citizen oversight board.   
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member 
XX to create a citizen oversight board comprised of three to five community 
members that would report to the City Council. 
AMENDMENT WITHDRAWN BY THE MAKER 
Council Member Tanaka preferred to utilize the HRC rather than the Police 
Chief's advisory group.   
Reverend Smith noted that the HRC was positioned to accept this role as it 
had been working with the Police Department over the past year.   
Mayor Fine indicated the HRC could be better suited to Subpart C.   
Council Member Cormack wished to obtain community input prior to 
determining a body. 
Council Member Filseth remarked that a sizable portion of the community 
felt less safe when a police car passed instead of safer.  Self-reflection was 
always good and appropriate. 
Council Member Kou asked if "Black Lives Matter" could be painted on Forest 
Avenue or Hamilton. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 13 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
Council Member Cormack suggested the HRC and Public Art Commission 
explore that.  It was possibly a component of Subpart C. 
Mr. Shikada proposed the Council and organization develop strategies to 
ensure changes were permanent. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
5. 
Adoption of a Resolution 9891 Entitled “Resolution of the Council of the 
City of Palo Alto Declaring an Intention to Temporarily Suspend the 
Levy of Assessment Against Businesses Within the Downtown Business 
Improvement District (BID) for Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 and Setting a 
Time and Place for a Public Hearing to be Held by the City Council on 
the Proposed Temporary Suspension;” or Other Direction to Staff 
Related to the District. 
David Ramberg, Assistant Director of Administrative Services reported Staff 
recommended suspending the Downtown Business Improvement District 
(BID) for Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 and reassessing the strategy later in the 
Fiscal Year.  The Downtown Business and Professional Association served as 
the advisory board for the BID.   
Brad Ehikian, Downtown Business Improvement District understood the 
struggles businesses were facing due to COVID-19 and supported Staff's 
recommendations. 
Vice Mayor DuBois believed the recommendation was prudent.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to 
adopt a Resolution of Intention to Temporarily Suspend the Levy of 
Assessments in the Palo Alto Downtown Business Improvement District 
(BID) for Fiscal Year 2021, setting a date and time for the public hearing on 
the proposal to suspend the levy assessments for June 23, 2020, at 5:00 
PM, or thereafter, on the Zoom meeting platform. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding a public hearing. 
Mayor Fine explained that the Resolution set the date for the public hearing.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney advised that the Council was directing Staff to 
return for a public hearing.   
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
6. 
Direct Staff to Continue With the 2020 Sustainability and Climate 
Action Plan (S/CAP) Update and Evaluate the 2020 S/CAP Proposed 
Goals and Key Actions THIS ITEM HAS MOVED TO JUNE 16, 2020. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 14 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
7. 
Discussion and Direction to Staff Regarding the Establishment of a 
Pension Funding Policy; and Approval of Amendment Number 1 to 
Contract Number C15159278 to Increase Compensation by $97,675 
for Additional Actuarial Consultant Services for a new Total Not-to-
Exceed Amount of $230,000 THIS ITEM HAS MOVED TO JUNE 16, 
2020. 
Study Session 
8. 
Direction on Actions to Facilitate Outdoor Dining and Retail on Streets, 
Sidewalks and Parking Areas in Response to COVID-19 Emergency. 
Rachel Tanner, Assistant Director of Planning and Community Environment 
reported Staff sought input regarding regulations to facilitate and enhance 
outdooring dining and retail throughout Palo Alto.  The most recent Shelter-
In-Place Order allowed outdooring dining and indoor retail sales to resume 
subject to some restrictions.  A vibrant and dynamic business district 
enhanced the quality of life for residents and generated tax revenues.  The 
proposed actions were able to help businesses survive and thrive during the 
pandemic. 
 
Staff 
proposed 
a 
streamlined 
application 
process 
for 
encroachment permits, which allowed restaurants to offer sidewalk dining; 
waiving permit fees; street closures to expand the area for outdoor dining; 
and a temporary Summer Streets program, which allowed seating and dining 
in parking spaces through an encroachment permit that would expire on 
December 31, 2020.  California Avenue businesses preferred a continuous 
closure of California Avenue through July to observe the impact of the 
closures on businesses.  Downtown businesses were split on closing 
University Avenue and installing parklets.  Conditional Use Permits (CUP) 
were able to be modified to allow up to 50 percent of a private parking lot to 
be used for retail or dining.  Amendments to the Municipal Code would be 
needed to allow retail businesses to display their goods outdoors.  Staff 
proposed allowing the consumption of alcoholic beverages with meals in 
outdoor spaces through the suspension of conditional use permits and/or 
conditions of approval.   
Carol Scott encouraged Staff to communicate details of the California 
Avenue closure with residents adjacent to California Avenue.   
Debbie Mytels noted other cities had closed streets to allow outdooring 
dining and retail and supported the closure of University and California 
Avenues. 
Ryan Globus urged the Council to support closure of California Avenue and 
University Avenue and use of parking lots. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 15 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
Bonnard preferred closing a few blocks of University and California Avenues 
as a pilot program.   
Jessica Roth believed Staff's proposal would save businesses along California 
Avenue and supported closing California Avenue seven days a week. 
Drew Maran supported temporary closures of University and California 
Avenues and allowing outdooring dining and retail.   
Stacey Olgado concurred with Mr. Maran's comments.   
Susan Chamberlain supported Staff's proposals and urged the Council to act 
quickly.   
Sandra Slater supported closing University and California Avenues seven 
days a week.   
Don Jackson proposed allowing restaurants across the City to offer 
outdooring dining in parklets.   
Darlene Yaplee concurred with Mr. Jackson's comments. 
Guillaume Bienaime opposed closing University Avenue and supported 
allowing all restaurants and retail businesses to operate in parklets into 
2021. 
John McDowell indicated he had spoken with the owner or manager for 
almost every restaurant on University Avenue, and the majority supported a 
trial closure of University Avenue.   
Charlie Weidanz supported temporary strategies to allow restaurants to 
reopen in compliance with new guidelines. 
Neilson Buchanan believed the Council had an obligation to review the 
feasibility of assumptions.  The Office of Transportation needed to study the 
loss of parking during the noon peak hours.   
Todd Burke, Palo Alto Central Homeowners Association President supported 
implementing Staff's recommendations for California Avenue within the 
week. 
Steve Frankel believed all of University Avenue should be closed for 
restaurant and retail use. 
Stefan Heck supported closing University and California Avenues.  Opening 
parking on side streets needed to address concerns about the loss of parking 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 16 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
on University Avenue.  Residents and foot traffic were necessary to support 
retailers.   
Neeraj Dewan supported closing University Avenue.  Indoor seating was not 
allowed in restaurants; therefore, outdoor seating was needed. 
David Epstein urged the Council to close University Avenue now and 
proposed the addition of 200 parking spaces.   
Celine Heck advised that the Summer Streets program would support 
businesses and benefit residents' mental health. 
Michael Ekwall felt Staff's recommendations were critical to the survival of 
small businesses.   
Jordan Nari supported a trial street closure and implementation of parklets 
for University Avenue. 
John Shenk, Thoit Brothers supported allowing restaurants and retail to use 
parklets and sidewalks but closing University Avenue was a bad idea. 
Rebecca Eisenberg supported closure of University and California Avenues 
and other streets and implementation of parklets.  The Palo Alto Shuttle and 
safe bike lanes were needed to alleviate parking issues. 
Brad Ehikian, Premier Properties opposed closing University Avenue but 
supported other components of Staff's recommendations.   
April Webster supported the Staff recommendation because sidewalks were 
too narrow to practice social distancing. 
Gail Price, Palo Alto Forward suggested the Council proceed to implementing 
the Staff recommendation.   
Mayor Fine asked if the Council could take action on some of Staff's 
proposals. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney advised that the Council could not take action as 
the item was a Study Session.  Staff was able to return to the Council 
quickly.   
Council Member Kniss felt this was the appropriate time for a new program 
and supported the Summer Streets program for both University and 
California Avenues.  She inquired whether Staff could implement the 
program for California Avenue on June 11. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 17 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager indicated Staff could act more quickly for 
California Avenue than for both streets.  He inquired about the Council's 
preference for closing California Avenue for several weeks or weekends. 
Council Member Kniss wanted full-time closure of California Avenue. 
Brad Eggleston, Director of Public Works believed University Avenue could be 
closed in two weeks if the Council approved it. 
Council Member Kniss remarked that closing the streets was intended to 
help businesses survive.   
Mr. Eggleston stated Staff could close University Avenue in a week, but there 
could be issues caused by rushing the project.   
Mr. Shikada asked the Council to provide Staff with clear direction, and Staff 
would provide a timeframe. 
Mayor Fine proposed the Council approve Staff's recommendations and 
direct Staff to return with needed actions. 
Ms. Stump recommended the Council provide direction regarding those 
items for which Staff and the public had noted a diversity of opinion.   
Mayor Fine preferred the most liberal actions possible. 
Council Member Cormack supported closing both University and California 
Avenues seven days a week through mid-August; two template designs for 
parklets; extending parklets through the end of the year; expanding into 
private parking lots; outdoor retail; and alcohol consumption with meals. 
Council Member Kou supported sidewalk dining; closing California Avenue; 
parklets on University Avenue; outdoor retail; use of parking lots; and 
alcohol consumption with meals.  She inquired about enforcement of 
Residential Preferential Parking Permit (RPP) programs in neighborhoods 
adjacent to University and California Avenues.   
Mr. Shikada related that parking enforcement was not occurring in the City.  
At some point, commercial business were to return such that parking 
enforcement was needed.   
Council Member Kou wanted to address parking before it affected adjacent 
neighborhoods. 
Ms. Tanner hoped to encourage residents to bike and walk as part of the 
Summer Streets program to reduce the need for parking. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 18 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked Staff to clearly indicate the components that were 
area specific versus Citywide when they returned to the Council.  He inquired 
about allocating a portion of streets to each business; keeping side streets 
open; program expiration when restaurants were allowed to utilize all indoor 
seating; managing alcohol consumption; and requiring compatible and 
attractive parklets.  He supported closing University Avenue seven days a 
week; temporary parklets and low-cost options; and alcohol consumption 
with meals.  In the future, the Council was possibly going to want to 
consider evaluating company cafeterias in relation to encouraging patronage 
of restaurants. 
Council Member Filseth requested some analysis of parking and asked if 
street space could accommodate a parklet for each business in Downtown. 
Ms. Tanner reported Staff had crafted a plan to facilitate co-location of 
parklets for adjacent restaurants.   
Council Member Filseth preferred closing California Avenue Thursday through 
Sunday in order to obtain data, but he could agree to full-time closure. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding the timeframe for issuance of 
permits for outdoor and parklet dining. 
Mr. Eggleston advised that Staff had received 19 applications Friday and 
issued one permit the following day.  He anticipated an additional ten 
permits would be issued prior to the weekend. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding outreach to residents. 
Mr. Shikada stated that outreach to neighborhoods had not occurred.  Staff 
was able to monitor parking and adjust the plan to address parking. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if anyone had objected to parklets. 
Mr. Shikada replied no.  
Council Member Tanaka supported the implementation of parklets and 
inquired regarding resistance to closing California Avenue. 
Mr. Shikada noted residents had expressed concern about closing California 
Avenue. 
Council Member Tanaka supported full-time closure of California Avenue; a 
streamlined process for permitting; and permit fee waivers.  He requested 
the concerns voiced about closing University Avenue. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 19 of 19 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/08/2020 
 
 
Mr. Shikada indicated concerns related to deliveries for businesses and the 
effects on businesses located on side streets and upper floors. 
Mr. Eggleston added that another concern was the impact on retail 
businesses that benefited from motorists rather than pedestrians. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about a survey. 
Ms. Tanner related that in-person communications and surveys revealed 
many University Avenue businesses preferred the expediency of street 
closure even if they preferred a parklet in the medium term. 
Mr. Shikada noted the Council did not provide clear direction for University 
Avenue. 
Mayor Fine conducted a straw vote, which indicated the Council supported a 
closure in some form. 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack noted a graduation car parade occurred on June 3, 
2020.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 1:11 A.M. in honor of Palo Alto 
high school graduates. 
