CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 24 
            Special Meeting 
February 24, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers at 5:05 P.M. 
Present:  
Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka   
Absent: 
 
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH LABOR NEGOTIATORS 
City Designated Representatives: City Manager and his Designees 
Pursuant to Merit System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada,             
Rumi 
Portillo, 
Sandra 
Blanch, 
Nicholas 
Raisch, 
Molly 
Stump,           
Terence Howzell, and Kiely Nose)  
Employee Organization: (1) Utilities Management and Professional 
Association of Palo Alto (UMPAPA) 
Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6 (a). 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to go into the Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:06 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:10 P.M. 
Mayor Fine announced no reportable action.  
Study Session 
2. 
Study Session on Community Policing. 
Robert Jonsen, Police Chief reported his expectation for the Police Department 
was to provide excellence in all activities, to proactively enforce the law and 
to serve the Palo Alto community with professionalism and respect.  
[Recruiting video shown.]  The Police Department's annual reports for 2018 
and 2019 were available online.  Personnel totaled 150, 69 percent of whom 
were male and 31 percent female.  Thirty-two personnel spoke multiple 
different languages.  The dispatch center was the third busiest in Santa Clara 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
County and responded to approximately 175,000 calls annually, 51,000 of 
which were directed to the Police Department.  In 2019, the dispatch center 
began receiving 9-1-1 text messages.  Property-related crimes had increased 
while home burglaries and assaults had declined in 2019.  Over the past ten 
years, the City had averaged far less than one homicide per year.  Goals for 
response times were less than 6 minutes for emergency calls, less than 10 
minutes for urgent calls, and less than 45 minutes for routine calls.  The Police 
Department had the most robust recording system of any agency in Santa 
Clara County.  Recordings generated evidence for court cases, assisted with 
officer accountability and protected personnel and the public.  [Video shown.]  
The Department purchased 60 body-worn cameras.  In 2019, 30,000 hours of 
video were recorded.  Over the past two years, cameras captured 163,000 
incidents.  Personnel had not experienced any equipment failures that 
impacted the ability to capture either video or audio.  Cameras within patrol 
vehicles captured incidents outside the vehicle.  Based on requests from the 
community, the traffic team returned to service in 2018.  During the second 
half of 2019, the traffic team visited six targeted locations identified by the 
Chief's Advisory Group and issued 650 citations.  Enforcement helped reduce 
traffic collisions.  Community Service Officers (CSO) returned to service and 
were well received.  He hoped to expand the program over the next few years.  
He formed the Chief's Advisory Group to communicate with residents and to 
obtain input.  The Department sponsored basic and advanced Citizen Police 
Academies and National Night Out, and Officers engaged in community 
events.  Recognizing that crime observed no boundaries, the Police 
Department participated in several regional task forces, but the Police 
Department did not participate in Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) raids.  The Department upgraded the 9-1-1 system and vehicles with 
mobile computers.  The online reporting system was hopefully going to be 
online in 2020.  The numbers for use of force incidents and administrative 
investigations were extremely low, compared to the number of services 
offered.  All use of force incidents were required to be reported, investigated 
and documented.  Investigation of incidents was comprehensive and 
documented.  Three-quarters of the time, use of force was use of physical 
strength to restrain an individual.  The Independent Police Auditor's (IPA) role 
was to review citizen complaints, administrative complaints, TASER use, 
administrative investigations and to recommend actions.  The IPA was 
reviewing one TASER use in 2019 and two citizen complaints.  The Department 
was investigating two citizen complaints and four administrative complaints, 
all of which were going to be sent to the IPA for review.  Senate Bill (SB) 1421 
allowed the public to request and access specific types of previously 
confidential police records.  Assembly Bill (AB) 748 implemented new 
disclosure provisions related to video and audio recordings.  SB 978 required 
all police departments to publish policies, practices, operational procedures 
and training material for public consumption.  The number of vacant sworn 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
positions was currently eight.  The Police Department was interested in hiring 
any individual who was mentally and physically able and could pass a 
background check.  The increasing suicide rate for police officers was 
disturbing.  He appreciated the City offering resiliency assistance to all City 
employees.  He committed to adding to the traffic team, enforcing traffic laws, 
attempting to reduce the number of property-related crimes and exploring 
innovative approaches to serving the community.  He was extremely proud of 
Police personnel and held each of them to high standards.   
Aram James disagreed with the decision to categorize certain incidents for 
Police Department investigation only.  He remarked regarding the Zach Perron 
incident.   
Winter Dellenbach commented that accountability should be embedded in the 
Annual Report.  The Annual Report minimized use of force incidents, which 
signaled that no improvement was needed.  The lack of current IPA reports 
was unacceptable.   
Roberta Ahlquist, Women's International League for Peace and Freedom 
inquired regarding the ethnic make-up of the Police Department.  The League 
opposed the use of TASERs and supported the use of body-worn cameras.  
The Police Department needed to be more transparent and accountable. 
Sunita de Tourreil asked about the definitions of a complaint and use of force.   
Mayor Fine requested Chief Jonsen respond to Ms. de Tourreil's questions. 
Mr. Jonsen advised that both definitions could be found online in the 
Department's Use of Force Policy and the Citizen Complaint Protocols and 
Procedures. 
Council Member Kniss inquired about the Ring Service. 
Mr. Jonsen indicated the Police Department was not connected to Ring in any 
way. 
Council Member Kniss asked if video captured by a Ring Doorbell could be 
given to the Police Department. 
Mr. Jonsen replied yes.  Police Officers always requested any evidence of a 
crime.  Ring video assisted the investigation and prosecution of crimes.  
Information was a key component of solving crimes.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Department compared the number of 
auto break-ins with the number in surrounding cities. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Mr. Jonsen related that every city in the region experienced an increase in the 
number of auto break-ins.  The vast number of break-ins was being conducted 
by organized crime.  Almost all of the perpetrators who were apprehended did 
not reside in Palo Alto.   
Council Member Tanaka stated his research indicated the per capita rate of 
auto break-ins in Menlo Park, Mountain View and Sunnyvale had decreased 
over the past few years.  He requested data on this issue from the Police 
Department. 
Mr. Jonsen explained that the cities were not comparable because most of 
Palo Alto's break-ins happened in mall parking structures while Menlo Park did 
not have a mall.  A strategy that worked in one city was not necessarily going 
to work in another city. 
Council Member Tanaka noted the larceny rate had almost doubled and 
requested Chief’s thoughts. 
Mr. Jonsen reported the focus on traffic enforcement caused the number of 
arrests for other offenses to decrease.  His joining the City in 2018 was 
possibly related to an increase in the number of arrests in 2018.  He suggested 
the 2019 statistics may have returned to normal levels.  Property-related 
crimes and recruitment were priorities for 2020. 
Council Member Tanaka concurred with bringing the traffic team back into 
service.  The community appreciated proactive enforcement against car 
break-ins.  He inquired regarding potential strategies to combat car break-ins. 
Chief Jonsen advised that high visibility worked well over the past six months 
with ghost cars and an additional officer patrolling Simon Properties and the 
Downtown area. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested Chief Jonsen consult Police Chiefs in other 
cities because their efforts seemed to be working.  He inquired regarding the 
three-day parking restriction. 
Chief Jonsen explained that an Officer marked a vehicle to begin the 72-hour 
time limit and returned after 72 hours to see if the vehicle had been moved.  
The vast majority of vehicles had been moved, perhaps only 100 feet but they 
had been moved.  If the vehicle had not been moved, the Officer issued a 
warning for the vehicle to be moved in another 72 hours.  If the vehicle had 
not been moved at the end of the second 72-hour period, the Officer issued a 
citation.  The Police Department received approximately 1,200 complaints 
about parking each year. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Council Member Tanaka related that community members told him that the 
Police Department had not responded to their complaints.  He asked if the 
Police Department addressed all complaints about parking. 
Chief Jonsen indicated the Police Department attempted to address all 
complaints, but its capacity was affected by staffing. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the rationale of issuing a citation 
immediately for exceeding a two-hour parking limit but issuing a warning for 
exceeding a 72-hour parking limit. 
Chief Jonsen explained that the Police Department had separate protocols for 
short-term parking and long-term parking issues.  He had discussed changing 
the Ordinance and related protocols with the City Manager and City Attorney.  
State law required the issuance of a warning at the end of 72 hours. 
Mayor Fine felt the Council and community were pleased with the return of 
the traffic team.  He inquired whether traffic enforcement improved driver 
behavior for long periods of time or only when Officers were visible. 
Chief Jonsen suggested repeated enforcement in the same area led to better 
driver behavior because drivers expected Officers to be present.  If Officers 
were stationed across the City, there was likely going to be a dramatic change 
in driver behavior.  If the Police Department was able to fill all their vacancies, 
the number of Officers assigned to the traffic team was expected to increase.   
Council Member Cormack felt the City was safe.  She appreciated the visibility 
of Officers throughout the City and asked if Officers issued citations to 
individuals using alternative modes of travel, such as bicycles, scooters and 
foot traffic. 
Chief Jonsen responded yes.  Each year, the Police Department did a lot of 
enforcement for student bicyclists.  Rather than receiving a citation, a student 
bicyclist was able to attend a training program.  The vast majority of citations 
for moving violations were issued to drivers. 
Council Member Cormack requested Chief Jonsen share crime prevention tips 
for the community. 
Chief Jonsen noted prevention tips were shared through social media.  Many 
victims of crime were not residents and, thus, did not follow the Police 
Department on social media.   
Council Member Cormack inquired about tools the Council should consider for 
the Police Department. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Chief Jonsen reported new tools would be developed over the next five years, 
and those tools could provide tremendous value to the community.  In the 
near future, drones were probably going to be used as a response protocol.   
Council Member Kou hoped the number of Officers on the traffic team would 
increase.  She asked if two Officers were assigned to the bike team. 
Chief Jonsen clarified that the Department did not have an official bike team.  
Typically, Sergeants determined when staffing was adequate for patrols on 
bicycle.  When staffing was adequate, any Police Officer was able to use a bike 
to patrol neighborhoods.   
Council Member Kou requested Officers monitor the California Avenue tunnel 
because there were many in the community that had noted numerous 
violations in that area.  She inquired about the qualifications and vetting of 
Reserve Officers.   
Chief Jonsen indicated the hiring process for Reserve Officers was the same.  
Reserve Officers were able to patrol the City, but typically the Department 
used them for special events.  While the Police Department had eight 
vacancies, four Police Officers were in patrol training, and five Police Officers 
were attending the academy.   
Council Member Kou asked if population growth was factored into the 
statistics.   
Chief Jonsen replied yes.  A metric for use of force incidents was the number 
of interactions with the public for each officer.  In this manner, one was able 
to understand whether one officer was using force more than any other officer.  
Most use of force incidents during his tenure had resulted from apprehending 
individuals under the influence or resisting arrest.   
Council Member Kou appreciated Police Officers talking to her children when 
they snuck out of the house, and she hoped that community service continued.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager advised that Chief Jonsen and he consulted almost 
daily about police issues.  When needed, consultations included the City 
Attorney and the Human Resources Department. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if Police Officers could turn off cameras when they 
wished. 
Chief Jonsen replied no.  Vehicle cameras activated when an Officer made a 
stop or activated the lights.  Police Officers had to manually activate the body 
cameras.  Policy required body cameras to be active when Police Officers 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
interacted with the public.  However, it was possible for incidents occurring 
prior to a Police Officer activating a body camera.   
Vice Mayor DuBois felt the increased number of use of force incidents was 
difficult to interpret.  He appreciated Chief Jonsen stating officer misconduct 
would not be tolerated and requested Chief Jonsen's opinion of electric 
scooters.   
Mr. Shikada indicated the issue would be before the Council in the next few 
weeks.   
Chief Jonsen advised that everyone had to be observant of all modes of 
transportation and to avoid distractions.   
NO ACTION TAKEN. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor Fine thanked the Marin County Sheriff's Office and other Public Safety 
Agencies involved in the search and rescue of Carol Kiparsky and Ian Irwin.   
Oral Communications 
Aram James commented on attempts to reverse the Supreme Court decision 
in New York Times vs Sullivan.  The Chief's Advisory Group was not subject to 
the Brown Act, which belied Chief Jonsen's claims of transparency.  The Police 
Department's Command Staff showed no ethnic diversity.   
Winter Dellenbach noted the Policy and Services Committee's six-month 
review of the Code enforcement audit did not occur.  The issues with Code 
enforcement dealt with more than staffing.   
Grant Brians reported the compostable bags required by City Ordinance 
actively decomposed leafy greens.  Leaving greens and herbs in the 
compostable bags for as little as one hour reduced the lifespan of the produce 
by one day.  If left in the bags for four to five days, produce was partially 
decomposed even with proper handling and refrigeration.  He requested the 
Council allow reusable plastic bags for produce. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager promised to follow up with Staff and commented 
that Staff was focusing on constructive implementation of the Ordinance 
rather than issuing citations. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Minutes Approval 
3. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the February 1, 3, and 10, 2020 Council 
Meetings. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to approve the Action Minutes for the February 1, 3, and 10, 2020 
Council Meetings. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Aram James addressing Agenda Item Number 10, believed the Council should 
hold a serious discussion of services for the homeless and requested removal 
of the item from the Consent Calendar.   
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 7.  
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 4-11. 
4. 
Approval of Contract Number C20175301 With S. Groner and 
Associates, Inc. in the Amount of $296,000 for Graphic Design and 
Public Outreach Services for Public Works Watershed Protection. 
5. 
Approval of Amendment Number 1 to Contract Number C18169791 With 
BKF Engineers to Increase the Third Year Funding by $150,000 and 
Extend the Contract Term for an Additional two Years at $300,000 per 
Year, for a new Not-to-Exceed Total of $1,200,000 to Provide Surveying 
and Design Services. 
6. 
Approval of Contract Number C20176783 With AECOM Technical 
Services, Inc. for Professional Services Related to the 2020 
Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) Update and SB743 
Implementation in the Amount of $573,228; and Approval of an 
Exemption from Competitive Solicitation for SB743 Scope of Work. 
7. 
Approval of a Three-year Agreement with Insight Public Sector for 
Citywide Microsoft Licensing, Utilizing the County of Riverside 
Agreement, in the Annual Amount of $497,486 and a Contingency of ten 
Percent in the Annual Amount of $49,748, for a Total Not-to-Exceed 
Amount of $547,234. 
8. 
Approval of a Blanket Purchase Order with Oldcastle Infrastructure, Inc., 
as the City's Standard Supplier of Certain Equipment for the Utility's 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Electric Underground System, in an Annual Amount of $350,000 for a 
Total Purchase Amount of $1,600,000 Over the Next 4.5 Years. 
9. 
Approval to Acquire Replacement Pre-hospital Monitors/Defibrillators for 
Emergency Responses in a Not-to-Exceed Amount of $709,644 for Fiscal 
Years 2020-2026. 
10. 
Interim Ordinance 5490 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council of the City 
of Palo Alto Amending Title 18 (Zoning) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code 
to Temporarily Allow Overnight Safe Parking on Sites in all Zoning 
Districts With a Church or Religious Institution;” Establishing Related 
Regulations, and Finding the Ordinance Exempt From the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Under Guidelines Section 15301 
(FIRST READING: January 13, 2020, PASSED 7-0). 
11. 
Approval of the Appointment of Council Member Kniss as the Alternate 
to the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) Group 2 Cities 
Working Group. 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 4-6, 8-11:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 7:  6-1 Tanaka no 
Council Member Tanaka found the cost of the Microsoft licenses to be higher 
than shown on Microsoft's website, and the Staff Report did not contain a good 
explanation of the difference.   
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager announced the Rail Town Hall scheduled for 
February 27, 2020 had been postponed to March 26, 2020, tentatively.  A 
recent blog posting to medium.com/atpaloaltoconnect addressed the City's 
efforts to increase public safety and emergency response.  The Police 
Department conducted undercover investigations at licensed tobacco retailers 
in Palo Alto and citations were issued to three retailers that did not properly 
check the age of the purchaser.  Staff wanted to present proposed revisions 
to the Tobacco Ordinance to the Council in April, 2020.  Palo Alto homeowners 
were possibly eligible for grants for seismic retrofits through the Earthquake 
Brace and Bolt Program.  The deadline to apply for the Human Relations 
Commission (HRC), Library Advisory Commission (LAC), Public Art 
Commission and Utilities Advisory Commission (UAC) was March 31, 2020.  
The Rail Expanded Community Advisory Panel (XCAP) were going to meet 
February 26, 2020.  The North Ventura Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP) open 
house, workshop and Family Science Night were scheduled for February 27, 
2020.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Action Items 
12. 
Evaluation of the Neighborhood Traffic Safety and Bicycle Boulevard 
Phase 1 Project, Including; Acceptance of Findings Regarding Increasing 
Bicycle Usage, Affirmation or Approval of Project Modifications, 
Affirmation of Planned Education Activities, and Process to Update 
Community Engagement; and Acknowledgement of Associated Actions 
by Staff. 
Council Member Cormack advised she would not participate in this item as she 
owned property in the area. 
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official reported Palo Alto's bicycle rates 
were comparable to those in the Netherlands.  In addition, the City's rate for 
children biking to school was among the highest in the Nation.  A bicycle 
boulevard was defined as low-volume, through-streets where bicycles had 
priority over automobiles, conflicts between bicycles and automobiles were 
minimized and bicycle travel time was reduced by the removal of stop signs 
and other impediments to bicycle travel.  Work was performed on Phases 1-5 
of the Neighborhood Traffic Safety and Bicycle Boulevard (NTSBB) Project, 
which had a total of nine phases.  After construction began on Ross Road, 
Staff responded to community feedback and paused construction in March, 
2018.  In August, 2018, construction was formally stopped.   
Wayne Tanda, MRG advised of some changes to traffic installations: a 
roundabout was installed at East Meadow; speed bumps, bulb-outs and islands 
were installed at various locations; a raised intersection was installed at 
Mayview; and stop signs were not removed as planned.  Community feedback 
to temporary installations for Phase 4 was primarily negative, so Staff did not 
pursue permanent construction.  Evaluation of bicycle boulevards was planned 
for 2019, but the lack of personnel delayed the evaluation.  Staff undertook 
community surveys and stakeholder interviews.  Approximately 80 percent of 
residents and 60 percent of other road users felt the bicycle boulevard needed 
to be modified.  Staff had collected data regarding vehicle, bicycle and 
pedestrian volumes, vehicle speeds, traffic collisions and motorist/bicyclist 
and pedestrian behaviors.  Unfortunately, data gathered in 2016 was limited.  
Notably, there were no reported accidents where bicycles were rear-ended or 
sideswiped on Ross Road, Amarillo or Moreno.  In January, 2020, Staff made 
14,000 observations of vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian behaviors over two 
days.  The devices installed on Ross Road increased bicycle usage, but the 
number of traffic collisions also increased.  The intersection of Ross Road and 
East Meadow needed to be controlled by a two-way stop for East Meadow.  To 
facilitate larger vehicles, the geometric modification of the roundabout at Ross 
Road and East Meadow needed to be modified.  To address speeding on Ross 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Road, south of Mayview, a speed bump needed to be considered.  The devices 
installed on Amarillo and Moreno did not change bicycle usage or the number 
of traffic collisions.  Stop signs needed to be placed at the intersections of 
Louis with Moreno, Fielding and Amarillo.   
Mr. Kamhi indicated lessons learned from the Ross Road Project were the need 
for greater community engagement and education for all road users, cost-
effective use of devices, an update of the 2001 Neighborhood Traffic Calming 
Program and the Public Works Department to lead large street projects. 
Ken Joye urged the Council to reaffirm the goal of maintaining the network of 
bicycle boulevards.   
Nicole Boelens supported the improvements planned for Ross Road. 
Arwin Boelens encouraged the Council to implement new cycling infrastructure 
to increase safety.  A network of bicycle infrastructure was needed for safe 
commutes and to address congestion.   
Liz Gardner supported bicycle infrastructure as a way to address single-
occupancy vehicle travel and the jobs/housing imbalance.  The State was 
offering vouchers for the purchase of cargo bikes.   
Paul Goldstein noted the Pedestrian and Bicycle Advisory Committee (PABAC), 
City/School Transportation Safety Committee and the Planning and 
Transportation Commission (PTC) had not reviewed the Staff Report.  A two-
way stop at the Ross/Meadow traffic circle was not appropriate.  Street 
closures needed to be considered.   
Gary Bradski remarked that the bulb-outs were causing issues and questioned 
the data that supported their installation.   
Sonya Bradski supported continued improvement of bicycle boulevards to 
increase bicycle travel.   
Arthur Liberman urged the Council to consider the stress level of bicyclists 
using bike boulevards.  Bicyclists preferred bikeways with low stress levels. 
David Coale supported the Staff recommendation and the Word on the Street 
program.  Improvements needed to be simple and straightforward. 
Stephen Rock commented that stop signs in the traffic circle at Ross and East 
Meadow would be disastrous.  Enforcement was a better solution. 
Eric Nordman noted the Council had directed Staff to utilize traffic calming 
measures rather than street closures on Ross Road.  He encouraged the 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Council to continue developing a bicycle network and to allow Staff to use 
street closures for bicycle boulevards. 
Eric Balin Watkins commented that bicycle boulevards improved residents' 
lives and asked the Council to finish the work it had begun. 
Keri Wagner supported bicycle boulevards because they reduced vehicle 
speeds.  South Palo Alto needed bicycle improvements. 
Suzanne Usiskin liked the bicycle improvements on Ross Road because they 
made her feel safer while biking.   
Steve Raney, Palo Alto Transportation Management Association (TMA) 
supported the objective to double bicycle travel in Palo Alto. 
Penny Ellson requested the Council direct Staff to reconsider the policy 
prohibiting street closures.  The bicycle and pedestrian boulevard network 
played an important part in the planned approach to safer, multimodal 
transportation and a sustainable community.   
Cedric de La Beaujardiere noted the rate of collisions per bicyclist decreased.  
Street closures contributed to the popularity and success of the Bryant Bike 
Boulevard.  He urged the Council to allow the Office of Transportation to 
consider road closures as a tool for bicycle boulevards. 
Frank Viggiano commented that traveling Ross Road with the improvements 
did require a bit more time, but no more time than waiting through two traffic 
signals.  People needed time and experience to become familiar with traffic 
circles.   
Pat Burt encouraged Staff to obtain community feedback and suggestions.  
Bicyclists and the whole community benefited from bicycle boulevards. 
Ken Kershner believed a robust bikeway network could triple the transit 
corridor for reasonable, 30-minute, Citywide access.  A wider corridor with 
safe bikeway networks was key to improving both housing and congestion.   
Robert Neff suggested "yield ahead" or "slow to 15 mph" signs and selective 
speed enforcement should be tried at the East Meadow traffic circle.  The 
Idaho stop needed to be allowed for stop signs.   
Kathy Durham concurred with Staff's recommendations except for the two-
way stop at the East Meadow traffic circle.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the rationale for not presenting the Staff 
Report to PABAC, the PTC and other advisory bodies for review. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Mr. Kamhi explained that additional review further delayed the Report.  The 
findings identified safety concerns that Staff felt should be addressed 
immediately. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the rationale for placing a stop sign in a 
traffic circle. 
Mr. Tanda advised that typically stop signs were installed to assign right-of-
way and to avoid conflicts.  The criterion for installing a stop sign was five 
collisions, and four collisions had occurred.  Seven of the eight traffic circles 
in Palo Alto were controlled with stop signs and two-way stop signs were better 
than all-way stop signs. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if Staff had developed a list of prioritized streets 
for installation of improvements. 
Mr. Kamhi advised that Staff wanted to present prioritization to the Council.  
With the Bike Bridge under construction, that segment needed to occur soon.  
Phases 6-9 of the NTSBB Project was going to likely follow next.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if temporary installations would be a 
component of future projects. 
Mr. Kamhi answered yes.   
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to: 
A. 
Accept this report on the Ross Road Bicycle Boulevard and 
Moreno/Amarillo Bicycle Boulevard project; 
B. 
Affirm the implemented modifications that have been made to the 
Bicycle Boulevard Phase 1 plan originally approved by the City; 
C. 
Approve proposed modifications including the designation of Ross Road 
and E. Meadow Drive as a two-way stop with the stops on E. Meadow 
Drive, the reassignment of stop controls on Louis Road at Moreno 
Avenue (west), at Moreno Avenue (east), at Fielding Drive and at 
Amarillo Avenue, and the installation of supplemental warning and guide 
signs and pavement markings; 
D. 
Affirm planned efforts by Staff to enhance educational activities to 
address the observed unsafe behavior of motorists, bicyclists, and 
pedestrians; 
E. 
Affirm that the community engagement process will be updated to 
reflect the lessons learned with the input of the Planning and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Transportation Commission, the Pedestrian and Bicycle Advisory 
Committee, and the City/School Traffic Safety Committee, and return 
the process to the City Council for discussion; 
F. 
Acknowledge that the guidelines, criteria, and design standard for the 
application of speed humps will be updated; and  
G. 
Acknowledge that the Office of Transportation is undertaking steps to 
build its staffing and capacity to manage projects like the Bicycle 
Boulevards. 
Council Member Tanaka noted mobility was a City initiative.  He concurred 
with constructing low-stress bicycle facilities.  Biking reduced congestion and 
greenhouse gas emissions.   
Mayor Fine preferred not to install stop signs in roundabouts.  Perhaps, the 
PTC and PABAC needed to review the East Meadow roundabout.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “Direct the Planning and 
Transportation Commission to look at the roundabout on East Meadow.”  (New 
Part H) 
Mayor Fine questioned the cost of constructing and revising the improvements 
and suggested the Motion direct Staff to consider cost-effective options. 
Mr. Kamhi reported yield signs were installed at the roundabout, but the signs 
could be larger.  More cost-effective measures were able to be implemented. 
Mayor Fine believed the policy for road closures and traffic diverters should be 
re-evaluated. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “Direct Staff to consider the 
full range of cost-effective options for bicycle infrastructure, including traffic 
diverters.” (New Part I)  
Mayor Fine asked if there were any policies or positions regarding Vision Zero, 
Complete Streets or Idaho stops. 
Mr. Kamhi indicated Complete Streets and Vision Zero could be incorporated 
into an update of the Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation Plan.   
Council Member Kniss felt the community needed more experience with 
roundabouts to feel comfortable with them.  She received community 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
feedback opposing any changes to the Bryant Bike Boulevard and  asked if 
Staff had considered planting a tree in a roundabout. 
Mr. Kamhi recommended not planting a tree in a roundabout because he 
advised emergency vehicles to traverse roundabouts if necessary. 
Council Member Kniss requested Staff comment regarding the bulb-outs on 
Ross Road. 
Mr. Tanda explained that bulb-outs shortened the crosswalk for pedestrians 
and reduced vehicle speeds.  Ross Road was designed for vehicles and 
bicyclists to share the roadway.   
Council Member Kniss commented that Ross Road was not wide enough to 
accommodate bicyclists and vehicles.  She inquired whether additional signage 
was needed on Bryant St.to direct traffic to Mountain View. 
Mr. Kamhi indicated increased signage for bicycle boulevards was a 
component of the project. 
Council Member Kniss hoped stop signs at the traffic circle would not be 
necessary.  Signage at the traffic circle on Bryant St. had potential for 
improvement. 
Council Member Filseth appreciated the data and asked how the accidents 
occurred at the traffic circle on Ross Road. 
Mr. Tanda reported in each case the motorist failed to yield and broad sided a 
bicyclist or another motorist.   
Council Member Filseth inquired whether the bicycle ran into the car as the 
car went by or if the car ran into the bicycle as the bicycle entered the circle. 
Mr. Tanda related that in each case the bicycle was in the intersection, and 
the motorist failed to yield. 
Mr. Kamhi reported the Police Department had asked Staff to redact the 
citations issued for accidents. 
Council Member Filseth asked if a two-way stop sign could prevent some of 
the collisions. 
Mr. Tanda believed a two-way stop sign would reduce the number of collisions. 
Council Member Filseth did not feel the two-way stop at the roundabout on 
Emerson and Everett was confusing.  He had not observed vehicles traveling 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
in the wrong direction in a roundabout.  A bicyclist was able to travel in the 
wrong direction to turn left in a roundabout.  The cost to install stop signs on 
Ross Road was minimal.  If they were not effective in reducing collisions, they 
were able to be removed.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager suggested the Council direct Staff to install the stop 
signs and refer the matter to the PTC to evaluate alternatives. 
Council Member Filseth proposed adding a referral of the stop sign issue to 
the PTC to the Motion. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding the length of time needed for the 
PTC or PABAC to review the issue. 
Mr. Shikada was not able to suggest a timeframe. 
Council Member Tanaka requested a timeframe for installing a stop sign. 
Mr. Kamhi believed it could be installed within a month. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding the PTC's ability to agendize an 
item. 
Carolyn Templeton, Planning and Transportation Commission Chair indicated 
the PTC could probably discuss the issue in one of the next two meetings. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to amend Motion Part H to state, “… after 
installation of stop signs.”  
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if Staff would return to the Council in August, 2020 
with Phases 6-9. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified that Staff would return in August, 2020 with a community 
engagement process and education efforts.  The status of the NTSBB Project 
was likely going to return to the Council in November, 2020.   
Vice Mayor DuBois believed the results were mixed as far as whether the 
project had achieved its objectives.  About half of motorists and bicyclists did 
not feel safe traveling Ross Road after the improvements were constructed.  
Many people found the roundabout confusing before and after the 
improvements were constructed.  He was skeptical that education would 
improve the safety of Ross Road.  He requested additional details of the 
changes that Staff would make at Ross and Meadow. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Mr. Tanda reported the proposed modifications had been driven by the input 
from service providers, particularly GreenWaste and the Fire Department.  The 
nose of Splitter Islands was to be cut down similar to the intersection of 
Moreno and Ross.  The tactile domes in the splitter islands were to be removed 
to comply with Federal standards.  The boulders within the traffic island were 
to be removed.  Signage was going to be relocated so that large vehicles could 
travel the traffic circle without striking them.   
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested removing the roundabout as it was small and 
made primarily of concrete.  Installing the stop signs was preferable to 
awaiting a recommendation from the PTC.  The roundabout was not attractive.  
The landscaping had died and should be replaced.  He asked if vegetation 
could be changed to make the roundabout more attractive.  
Mr. Kamhi replied yes. 
Mr. Shikada advised that maintenance of landscaping was an ongoing issue 
for the City.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the PTC could review signage as well as the stop 
signs. 
Mayor Fine understood the intent of the Motion was for the PTC to review the 
intersection as a whole. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired whether Part I of the Motion was limited to Ross 
Road.   
Mayor Fine explained that Part I directed Staff to consider a full range of cost-
effective infrastructure for bicycle projects across the City. 
Council Member Kou questioned whether the Council could refer review of 
street landscaping to the Parks and Recreation Commission.  She asked if the 
roundabout had a water supply. 
Mr. Shikada responded no. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “Direct the Parks and 
Recreation Commission to look at more greenery features in the roundabouts.” 
(New Part J) 
Council Member Kou expressed concern about children navigating the Ross 
Road improvements.  She asked if a bike lane could be constructed between 
the curb and parked cars.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Mr. Kamhi indicated the roadway was not wide enough for on-street parking 
and a protected bike lane.   
Council Member Kou inquired whether a shared-use path could be constructed 
on Ross Road. 
Mr. Kamhi advised that parking on one side of the street would have to be 
removed or the travel lanes would have to be one way if a shared-use path 
was constructed. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested the PTC review future bicycle projects to 
determine the feasibility of a protected bike lane.   
Mr. Kamhi related that Staff had spoken with the City of Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, regarding its parking-protected bike lanes.  This feature could 
be included in an updated Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation Plan. 
Council Member Kou wanted to ensure all users were safe and comfortable 
traveling along Ross Road.  She asked if approval of the Staff recommendation 
would direct Staff to proceed with Phases 6-9. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified that Staff would work on a Community Engagement Plan 
and engage the community before constructing any project.   
Council Member Kou inquired regarding Staff's plans for education. 
Mr. Kamhi hoped to expand the Safe Routes to School model to additional 
road users.   
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Tanaka moved, 
seconded by Mayor Fine to: 
A. 
Accept this report on the Ross Road Bicycle Boulevard and 
Moreno/Amarillo Bicycle Boulevard project; 
B. 
Affirm the implemented modifications that have been made to the 
Bicycle Boulevard Phase 1 plan originally approved by the City; 
C. 
Approve proposed modifications including the designation of Ross Road 
and E. Meadow Drive as a two-way stop with the stops on E. Meadow 
Drive, the reassignment of stop controls on Louis Road at Moreno 
Avenue (west), at Moreno Avenue (east), at Fielding Drive, and at 
Amarillo Avenue, and the installation of supplemental warning and guide 
signs and pavement markings; 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
D. 
Affirm planned efforts by Staff to enhance educational activities to 
address the observed unsafe behavior of motorists, bicyclists, and 
pedestrians; 
E. 
Affirm that the community engagement process will be updated to 
reflect the lessons learned with the input of the Planning and 
Transportation Commission, the Pedestrian and Bicycle Advisory 
Committee, and the City/School Traffic Safety Committee, and return 
the process to the City Council for discussion; 
F. 
Acknowledge that the guidelines, criteria, and design standard for the 
application of speed bumps will be updated; and  
G. 
Acknowledge that the Office of Transportation is undertaking steps to 
build its staffing and capacity to manage projects like the Bicycle 
Boulevards;  
H. 
Direct the Planning and Transportation Commission to look at the 
roundabout on East Meadow after installation of stop signs; 
I. 
Direct Staff to consider the full range of cost-effective options for bicycle 
infrastructure, including traffic diverters; and 
J. 
Direct the Parks and Recreation Commission to look at more greenery 
features in the roundabouts. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-0 Cormack recused 
Council took a break at 9:59 P.M. and returned at 10:07 P.M. 
13. 
Update from the Ad Hoc Committee (Vice Mayor DuBois and Council 
Member Cormack) on Boards and Commissions and Potential Next Steps 
Mayor Fine reported Council Member Cormack and Vice Mayor DuBois were 
appointed and reappointed to an Ad Hoc Committee to explore the use, 
efficiency and direction of City Boards and Commissions.   
Council Member Cormack advised that the Ad Hoc Committee had issued a 
survey, interviewed Staff who worked with Boards and Commissions, and 
reviewed documents from other jurisdictions.  The response rate for the 
survey was approximately 50 percent.  The Ad Hoc Committee developed six 
recommendations for the Council.  The Ad Hoc Committee requested Council 
input regarding annual work plans, a process to change work plans during the 
year, term limits, a single interview period, and changes to Boards and 
Commissions.  Next steps were to draft a handbook for Boards and 
Commissions and revise the Council Protocols and Procedures and Ordinances.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted the handbooks from other jurisdictions were useful, 
and the Ad Hoc Committee had requested Staff begin preparing a handbook 
for City Boards and Commissions.  Most cities used work plans and imposed 
term limits.   
David Coale, Carbon Free Palo Alto suggested a Climate or Sustainability 
Commission would slow the process for implementing changes.   
Cari Templeton, Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) Chair believed 
separating planning and transportation would be difficult.  In 2019, the PTC's 
Agenda did not include transportation projects because the Office of 
Transportation was short staffed.  If necessary, the PTC was able to find a way 
to ensure transportation projects were not overlooked. 
Bob Moss, Library Advisory Commissioner remarked that Boards and 
Commissions served to obtain public input and to resolve issues before they 
became serious concerns.   
Valerie Stinger, Human Relations Commission (HRC) Vice Chair appreciated 
the Ad Hoc Committee's recommendations for work plans, roles and 
responsibilities, and training. 
Ed Lauing, Planning and Transportation Commissioner remarked that the 
existing interview process was neither comprehensive nor lengthy.  Additional 
vetting of candidates' applications was a good idea.  The PTC had the capacity 
to review transportation and planning projects.  The transportation and 
planning aspects of projects were often intertwined. 
Jeff Greenfield, Parks and Recreation Commissioner supported work plans for 
Boards and Commissions but expressed concern that Council approval of work 
plans was anticipated to delay the work of Boards and Commissions.  A limit 
of three terms was necessary to ensure at least one member had experience 
on the Board or Commission.   
Penny Ellson did not know how the PTC could be separated because planning 
and transportation were inextricably linked.   
Mayor Fine asked Council Members to respond to the Ad Hoc Committee's 
request for input.  A handbook was a necessity.  A cover sheet for applications, 
a handbook, one interview period and the filtering of candidates were good 
ideas.  The work plans were able to cover two years to avoid delays in Board 
and Commission work.  He requested the number of Board and Commission 
members who had served two or more terms.  He supported disbanding the 
Library Advisory Commission (LAC) once their Bond Oversight duties were 
complete.  He did not recommend the PTC be separated; however, the PTC 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
rather than the Architectural Review Board (ARB) needed to review 
development projects' compliance with the Zoning Code.  He wanted to 
understand the role of a Sustainability or Climate Board or Commission.  The 
HRC reviewed some issues pertaining to seniors, and seniors in the community 
frequently provided relevant comments to the Council.   
Council Member Filseth indicated work plans, a handbook and a single 
interview period should be explored.  The remaining points did not appear to 
be problems that needed solutions.   
Council Member Kniss asked if the Ad Hoc Committee spoke with the Chairs 
of Boards and Commissions and, if so, did they provide input. 
Council Member Cormack related that many Chairs sent emails. 
Council Member Kniss inquired regarding's Staff's involvement. 
Council Member Cormack reported Staff executed the survey and  Staff from 
the City Manager's Office met with the Ad Hoc Committee and Staff liaisons of 
Boards and Commissions.  The City Attorney's Office provided good document 
exemplars from other jurisdictions. 
Council Member Kniss felt a Senior Commission was a terrific idea if Staff had 
the capacity.  A Sustainability Board was not needed.  Planning and 
Transportation were completely intertwined.  Work plans and term limits were 
good ideas.  She inquired regarding the number of Board and Commission 
members. 
Beth Minor, City Clerk, replied 58. 
Council Member Kniss related that one interview period would not be sufficient 
to replace members.   
Ms. Minor added that two interview periods had been conducted over the past 
several years. 
Council Member Kniss agreed that further discussion of changes to Boards and 
Commissions was needed.  She requested copies of the handbooks from other 
jurisdictions. 
Council Member Cormack advised that the Staff Report contained links to the 
handbooks. 
Council Member Kniss asked if the many aspects of Boards and Commissions 
were different in each jurisdiction. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
Council Member Cormack indicated a few jurisdictions had more Boards and 
Commissions. 
Council Member Kou understood senior issues fell under the HRC's purview.  
She felt the PTC should not be separated and concurred with Mr. Greenfield's 
comment regarding term limits.  New members needed training.  The Boards 
and Commissions needed to be relevant to the Council.  Staff needed to utilize 
existing technology to assist Boards and Commissions during meetings. 
Council Member Tanaka believed the purpose of Boards and Commissions was 
to obtain community input and to review issues in depth.  The Council needed 
to trust their Boards and Commissions and delegate more issues to them.  
Perhaps each Council Member should appoint one person to each Board and 
Commission.  Separating the PTC was not logical.  One interview period did 
not seem feasible.   
Vice Mayor DuBois indicated the intent behind a Work Plan was to align the 
Council and Boards and Commissions.  Work plans did not have to coincide 
with the calendar year.  Many cities used a Seniors Commission to look at 
issues of aging, which were separate from the HRC's concerns.  The proposal 
to separate the PTC was based on the City having separate Planning and 
Transportation Departments.  Like the City Council, Board and Commission 
members were able to serve two terms, sit out one term and apply for another 
term.  The regular recruitment was able to occur in the spring, and recruitment 
for unexpected vacancies was able to occur in the fall.  Staff leveraged some 
Boards and Commissions to complete their annual goals.  He had no 
preference for retaining or disbanding the LAC.  The Council had pushed 
sustainability into all City departments, and a sustainability commission was 
probably not needed.   
Council Member Cormack believed a handbook would address the few issues 
with Boards and Commissions.  The Ad Hoc Committee did not discuss 
interactions between and among Board and Commissions, but that was able 
to be sorted in the description of each Board and Commission.  Work plans 
helped Boards and Commissions set their agendas and work with the Council.  
Term limits were beneficial.  She supported disbanding the LAC and forming 
a Senior Commission.   
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to direct 
the ad hoc to continue their good work and explore the following issues: 
A. 
Annual work plans and process to change them;  
B. 
Make a proposal on term limits;  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
C. 
Explore moving to a single interview period in the Spring;  
D. 
Throw a party for and disband the Library Advisory Commission; and 
E. 
Scope out and provide feedback on what other cities do for both the 
Senior and Sustainability Commissions. 
Mayor Fine requested the Ad Hoc Committee explore providing the PTC with 
discretionary review and approval.   
Council Member Kniss requested Part C of the Motion include a second 
recruitment in the fall. 
Ms. Minor reported in 2013 recruitment was changed to interview candidates 
twice a year.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to Motion Part C, “including Fall as a 
backup.”  
Vice Mayor DuBois noted some City Councils used a subcommittee to filter 
candidates for select Boards and Commissions. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the input the Ad Hoc Committee 
received for Part D of the Motion and from whom. 
Council Member Cormack clarified the Chair and Vice Chair had recommended 
disbanding the LAC during the Study Session with the Council.  The Friends of 
the Library had submitted a letter indicating they had no opinion and no 
significant concerns about disbanding the LAC.  The former Library Director 
provided information about the significant amount of time Staff utilized on 
behalf of the LAC.   
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by 
Council Member Kniss to Direct the Ad hoc to continue their good work and 
explore the following issues: 
A. 
Annual work plans and process to change them;  
B. 
Make a proposal on term limits;  
C. 
Explore moving to a single interview period in the Spring, including Fall 
as a backup;  
D. 
Throw a party for and disband the Library Advisory Commission; and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 24 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  02/24/2020 
E. 
Scope out and provide feedback on what other cities do for both the 
Senior and Sustainability Commissions. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack reported Council Member Filseth, City Manager 
Shikada and she were in Sacramento the prior week to follow up on the 
request for funding to design grade separation.  She requested an update 
regarding the lease for Cubberley Community Center. 
Council Member Filseth added that $1 million in funding for grade separation 
was contained in the prior year's Senate Budget but not the Assembly's 
Budget.  Momentum was building for Faster Bay Area if it was combined with 
a Housing Bill.  If Faster Bay Area was proposed for the 2020 ballot, it was 
going to require a higher majority vote to be adopted.   
Council Member Kniss advised that a City delegation was to travel to 
Washington, D.C., on March 7, 2020 regarding Rail Crossings.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:18 P.M. with gratitude to the 
Marin County First Responders who rescued Palo Alto citizens, Carol Kiparsky 
and Ian Irwin.  
 
