CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 27 
Special Meeting 
 
October 05, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in Virtual 
Teleconference at 5:04 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Study Session 
1. 
2951 El Camino Real [20PLN-00158]: Pre-screening of a Proposal to 
Rezone the Subject Property From CS (Service Commercial) and R-1 
(Single-Family Residential) to Planned Home Zoning (PHZ) and 
Redevelop the Site With a Mixed-use Development That Includes 
Approximately 119 new Residential Units, 5,000 Square Feet of Office 
Space, and 1,000 Square Feet of Retail Space. Environmental 
Assessment: not a Project and any Subsequent Formal Application 
Would be Subject to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
Zoning District: CS (Service Commercial) and R-1 (Single-Family). 
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning and Community Environment presented 
the item to the City Council (Council). In February 2020, Council was 
supportive of implementing a Planned Housing Zone that included an 
Inclusionary Housing Requirement of 20 percent. The project at 2951 El 
Camino Real was designed to use the Planned Housing Zone (PHZ). It 
contained 119-housing units, 5,000-square feet of office, 1,000-square feet 
of retail, and included a mix of studios, 1-bedrooms, and 2-bedroom units. 
The project did not provide a net increase in jobs and it did meet the 20 
percent Inclusionary Housing Requirement with 20 percent of units meeting 
the 80 percent Area Median Income (AMI). The two adjacent R-1 parcels on 
Olive Avenue would be incorporated and redeveloped along with the project. 
Policy considerations included waiving the Retailed Preservation Compliance 
in terms of parking, incorporate the adjacent R-1 Zone, Floor Area increase, 
consideration for exceeding the Transitional Height Limit, and Legislative 
Amendments to the Zoning Code and General Plan. Staff’s recommendation 
was to hold the pre-screening and answer any of Council questions.  
Gary Johnson, Acclaim Companies Partner summarized that Acclaim 
Companies owns projects in the City of Menlo Park, City of East Palo Alto, City 
of Cupertino and Redwood City. The proposed project provided 24 affordable 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
units with 95 market-rate units ranging in rental price points. The project is 
located on a parcel that provided easy access to transit for jobs and 
encourages alternative modes of transportation. The reason for incorporating 
the R-1 and CS Zoned parcels on Olive Avenue were to increase the lot area 
to 1.1-acres which allowed the project to build a 1-story below-grade parking 
garage. The high land and construction costs within the City made it hard for 
multi-family housing to be built and so the granting of the requested Variances 
is vital for the project to move forward. Acclaim Companies held a community 
meeting for residents along Olive Avenue and Pepper Avenue to discuss the 
project.  
Sherry Scott, Acclaim Companies, Architect Founder summarized several 
design components that made the project unique. The subterranean garage 
allowed for ground floor units, retail and office space. The office and retail 
space fronts El Camino Real as well as the main residential lobby. The project 
does provide a central open courtyard that does comply with the Open Space 
Requirements of the City. Starting on the third floor and moving up to the fifth 
floor, the floors pull back to preserve the Day Light Plane. The tallest portion 
of the building at 65-feet is located at the front along El Camino Real. 
Ken Joye commented that he is a resident of the Ventura Neighborhood and 
expressed his frustration that the housing burden is being placed fully on his 
neighborhood. 
Angie Evans announced she would love to see a project like this in the 
Crescent Park Neighborhood and supported the project. She urged Council to 
approve the project because the City needed more housing.  
Ryan Globus supported the project. 
Anupa Bajwa is a homeowner on Olive Avenue and is concerned about the 
Day Light Plan adjacent to her home being compromised by the new structure. 
She believed that the developer is not conveying the size, scale, and impacts 
of the project. 
Becky Sanders agreed that the amount of housing development is substantial 
in the Ventura Neighborhood and that the housing burden is being pushed 
onto the neighborhood. She did not support the project. 
Rohin Ghosh believed the proposed project is a strong step in the right 
direction and supported more projects like the proposed project in the future. 
Matt Bryant announced he is a resident on Pepper Avenue and is concerned 
about the potential violation of the North Ventura Coordinated Area Plan 
(NVCAP) as well as the existing Building Codes. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Kelsey Banes acknowledged that the PHZ provided an avenue for more 
projects like the proposed project to come forward. She agreed that more 
projects like the proposed needed to be located in other neighborhoods, but 
she supported the project.  
Michele Sullivan encouraged the Council to consider the NVCAP as well as the 
El Camino Design Guidelines when approving PHZ projects in the area. 
Rebecca Eisenberg supported the project. She expressed that the developer 
needed to seek input from the neighbors and believed that Alternative M is 
the superior project. She wanted to see more very-low-income housing  
included in future projects.  
Kevin Ma wanted to see more specificity regarding the affordable housing 
component of the project. He encouraged the project to include bike and 
pedestrian items. 
Mayor Fine emphasized that the project is the second PHZ Project the Council 
has reviewed but the first project to use the newly adopted Affordability 
Requirements. The first PHZ Project on 3300 El Camino Real is not moving 
forward because the developer felt that the Council was too strong with their 
criticisms.  
Council Member Kniss requested more information in terms of the financial 
feasibility of the project. 
Mr. Johnson restated that the key issues in Palo Alto are high land values and 
construction costs in the Bay Area. The one-story subterranean garage and 
the 5-story facility helped make the project pencil out.  
Council Member Cormack liked that the project included 32, 2-bedroom units, 
no issues with parking, that retail is being preserved, the integration of 
income-restricted units, and that it is close to jobs. She asked Mr. Lait to 
summarize the plan for El Camino Real.  
Mr. Lait answered that there was no plan for El Camino Real except for some 
parcels that were part of the NVCAP.  
Council Member Cormack announced that one concern was the direct 
proximity to R-1 homes. She noted that one exception she was willing to let 
future applicants do was to exceed the height limit by 10 percent to achieve 
20 percent of units to be affordable.  
Council Member Kou asked what the affiliation was between the owner and 
Acclaim Companies.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Mr. Johnson reported that the project was a joint venture, not a land lease. 
Council Member Kou wanted to know more about open space.  
Mr. Johnson mentioned that there was an open courtyard as well as balconies 
for the units.  
Ms. Scott added along with the courtyard and balconies there will be 
landscaped setback to the adjacent R-1 homes. The two R-1 facilities that the 
project was proposing to absorb were to be redeveloped to a townhouse scale.  
Council Member Kou asked if there were mechanical lifts for parking at any of 
Acclaim Companies’ other facilities.  
Mr. Johnson answered there were no mechanical lifts at any of Acclaim 
Companies’ sites. 
Vice Mayor DuBois mentioned that there were El Camino Design Guidelines to 
consider. 
Mr. Lait confirmed that is correct, but there were no new corridor plans in the 
pipeline for El Camino Real.  
Vice Mayor DuBois remarked that there was some skepticism on how the PHZ 
was going to work and it was really in a trial period. He saw the project as a 
massive project and wanted to understand if it was possible to have it scaled 
down and still be profitable. He wanted to see a quantification of what the 
exceeding zoning was, in terms of benefits for the City. He inquired if the 
project was to be profitable if it stayed in the required height limits, if it helped 
the project to convert all units to studios and to know why office space was 
included. 
Mr. Johnson explained that having all units be studios did not allow the project 
to market to all income levels and having bedroom variations was a benefit to 
the community. The office was an existing component on the site. The design 
was very close to the margin of feasibility and if the project was required to 
conform to the height limits then the project was not going to pencil out.  
Mayor Fine disclosed that the goal of PHZ was for projects to come forward 
that exceed the Zoning Requirements. He liked that the project met the City’s 
Parking Requirements, no net new commercial space, maintained retail, and 
provided 24 affordable units. He agreed with the comments regarding 
neighborhood equity but noted that PHZ was City-wide and that the City 
needed to look at ways to incentivize projects in other neighborhoods. He 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
requested what the PHZ Ordinance included, what Legislative Amendments 
were needed, and General Plan changes.  
Mr. Lait responded that the General Plan designated that the R-1 Zone was 
for single-family homes and that needed to be amended to allow multi-family 
units. That amendment triggered a Comprehensive Plan Amendment to reflect 
that change in density. Staff believed that the Zoning Code needed to be 
amended to state that units for the PHZ were able to exceed the height limits. 
Mayor Fine predicted that a change in the PHZ language regarding height 
applied to all PHZ projects. 
Mr. Lait confirmed that was correct, but Council had the final say on if a project 
was to advance. 
Mayor Fine summarized that the project was 6 feet above the height limit on 
El Camino Real and 2 feet above the Transitional Height Limit in the rear. 
Mr. Lait declared that the whole project was subject to the 35 foot Height Limit 
because of the adjacency to the R-1 Zone. The project transitioned between 
35 to 65 feet. 
Mayor Fine requested more detailed diagrams and analysis in terms of the 
height of the project, as well as for the Day Light Plan.  
Council Member Tanaka asked how many units would be available if all units 
were studios.  
Mr. Johnson answered that with all studios the unit count increased but the 
project would not meet the Parking Requirements.  
Ms. Scott estimated it would be an additional 40 to 50 units if the units were 
all studio apartments. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired how big the current studio apartments were. 
Ms. Scott answered roughly 570 square feet. 
Council Member Tanaka commented that no parking lifts were proposed. 
Ms. Scott clarified that a small number of pit lifts were proposed. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired if the Parking Requirement could be met if 
puzzle lifts were used. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Ms. Scott specified that the proposed lifts were puzzle lifts but located in a pit 
below the garage.  
Council Member Tanaka recommended that the applicant explored a more 
aggressive mechanical lift to accommodate more parking.  
Council Member Filseth commented that it was hard to consider the project in 
isolation from the NVCAP process and that there were no policies to convert 
R-1 zones to other zones. Specific to the project, he concurred with Council 
Member Cormack’s remarks in terms of her likes. He liked the due diligence 
in terms of parking, that the project looked healthy from an economic 
perspective; the public benefit was the Below Market Rate (BMR) housing. He 
wanted to understand what parameters would be involved if the existing 
height requirements were hit or if a different inclusionary profile was applied.  
Vice Mayor DuBois reminded the Council that the current code stated that a 
building had to be at 35 feet or below in height when it was within 150-feet of 
an R-1. He asked if the benefits of the project were worth the cost of building 
above the existing Height Requirements. One concern regarding the project 
included converting R-1 properties into the PHZ Zone. He did not support 
exceeding the height limit and he urged the Council to consider a commercially 
developed moratorium for the Ventura Neighborhood until the NVCAP process 
was complete. He inquired what the status was for Code Enforcement for 
commercial uses in R-1. 
Mr. Lait explained that the existing residents were not going to be required to 
vacate until an application was filed.  
Vice Mayor DuBois questioned if the fee associated with Code Enforcement 
could be deposited into the Affordable Housing Fund.  
Mr. Lait summarized that fees collected through Code Enforcement were 
deposited into the General Fund. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if there was a commitment from Acclaim Companies 
to have access to all the R-1 parcels.  
Mr. Johnson confirmed that there were agreements from all property owners.  
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to see the Code Enforcement issue resolved. 
Council Member Kou disclosed the biggest issues were the neighbors in 
adjacent R-1 single-family homes, minimal open space and many of the units 
were luxury units. She wanted to understand mechanical lifts and if they were 
used by residents. Also, the project needed to work within the NVCAP 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
perimeters and future affordable housing projects needed to have a greater 
BMR unit percentage to justify exceeding existing Zoning Requirements.  
Council Member Cormack remarked that the project did comply with the Open 
Space Requirement. 
Ms. Scott clarified that the intention was to comply with the Open Space 
Requirement for all of the units.  
Council Member Cormack asked Mr. Lait to summarize the PHZ benefits. 
Mr. Lait recalled that the prior Council discussion reflected that the 20 percent 
of inclusionary housing was a huge benefit. Staff continued to advocate for 
more projects to be built. 
Council Member Cormack proclaimed that there was a benefit to the City to 
produce market-rate units.  
Mr. Lait confirmed that was correct and the City was just making the Regional 
Housing Need Assessment (RHNA) numbers for market-rate units. The PHZ 
was balancing the production of housing that supported all income levels and 
included Inclusionary Requirements. 
Council Member Kniss commented that the Comprehensive Plan expressed 
that 300-housing units needed to be built per year to reach the City’s goals.  
Mr. Lait indicated it was correct. 
Council Member Kniss specified that the RHNA numbers for the City were very 
large and that no developer was able to build a building with 50 percent BMR 
units. Due to the Council expressing that the proposed site was not available 
because of the NVCAP process, she requested the location of sites that were 
able to support a project like the one being proposed. 
Mr. Lait mentioned there were sites all over the City and potential projects 
that were brought forward to Staff that mimicked the components of 
exceeding height limits and the FAR.  
Council Member Kniss hoped there was agreement amongst the Council on 
what was acceptable because if no decision was made then developers were 
no longer going to bring projects forward. 
Council Member Filseth agreed that a project providing 50 percent BMR units 
was impossible and believed that the site was in a good location for a project 
like the one proposed. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Council Member Tanaka asked how many cars were able to be in a garage if 
puzzle lifts were used. 
Mr. Johnson noted that many people did not like lifts, which was why they 
were not used in all garages. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if a 2-bedroom or a studio was more profitable, 
in terms of percentage profit. 
Mr. Johnson explained that studios had a higher generation of revenue than a 
2-bedroom apartment, but it was more important to provide units for all 
incomes because it gave more options to tenants.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired if the units were rental units or owned. 
Mr. Johnson said rent only. 
Council Member Tanaka liked that the units were rental units and that the 
office and retail units on the ground floor faced traffic.  
Vice Mayor DuBois clarified that common open space was met but the private 
open space was not met.  
Mr. Lait agreed.  
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Oral Communications 
 
Anupa Bajwa asked the City Council (Council) Members if they wanted a 36-
foot high wall 10-feet away from their property line. 
Roland Lebrun commented that there was no need for passing tracks through 
Palo Alto if Caltrain used the existing four-track section between the City of 
Atherton and Redwood City. Also, the Caltrain Engineering Standards did not 
allow grade crossings with more than three tracks. If the City decided to do 
four tracks, Caltrain was not going to pay for it. In conclusion, he advised the 
Council to reinstate the Rail Committee once the Expanded Community 
Advisory Panel (XCAP) finished their work.  
Caltrain User urged the Council and Palo Alto (City) residents to vote no on 
the Sale Tax increase to bail out Caltrain’s Measure RR.  
Jon Anderson was building an Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) on his property 
in Barron Park and under current regulations the HVAC unit had to be located 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
in the middle of the property. He requested that the City not require that and 
said it was easier to connect the ADU to the sewer line. 
Rebecca Eisenberg expressed her sympathies regarding living near a large 
multi-family dwelling.  Studies showed that multi-family facilities increased 
the value of homes.  
Kevin Ma reminded the Council that the Regional Housing Needs Assessment 
(RHNA) numbers were going to change, which required Zoning Code changes. 
He urged the Council not to be so nit-picky towards developers and supported 
densification.  
Kelsey Banes supported the comments regarding densification and 
encouraged residents to vote yes on Measure RR. She requested Vice Mayor 
DuBois retract his statements regarding receiving funds from developers.  
Rohin Ghosh echoed approval of Measure RR, the densification of Palo Alto, 
and the retraction of Vice Mayor DuBois’s comments.  
Chetan Patwardhan was concerned about the maximum height limit for ADU’s. 
Minutes Approval 
2. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the September 21, 2020 City Council 
Meeting.  
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
approve the Action Minutes for the September 21, 2020 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 4. 
Council Member Kniss, Mayor Fine, and Council Member Tanaka registered a 
no vote on Agenda Item Number 7. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 3-7. 
3. 
Resolution 9919 entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Approving and Authorizing the City Manager to Execute the 
Professional Services Agreement Between the Northern California Power 
Agency (NCPA) and the Cities of Palo Alto and Santa Clara for Electric 
Transmission, Generation and Regulatory Consulting Services, on Behalf 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
of the City of Palo Alto”, in an Amount Not-to-Exceed $821,875 Through 
October 31, 2025.  
4. 
Approval of Fiscal Year 2020 Reappropriation Requests to be Carried 
Forward Into Fiscal Year 2021 and Budget Amendments in Various 
Funds.  
5. 
Review and Approval of the 2020 Annual Williamson Act Contract 
Renewals Within Palo Alto City Limits.  
6. 
Approval of Amendment Number 1 to Contract Number C20176363 With 
Magellan Advisors, LLC for an Integrated Fiber Expansion Approach and 
Acceleration of the Fiber-to-the-Premises (FTTP) Business Case, and to 
Increase Compensation by $285,065 for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount 
of $497,576.  
7. 
Ordinance 5506 entitled, “Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Amending Section 18.18.090 (Parking and Loading) of Chapter 
18.18 (Downtown Commercial District) of Title 18 (Zoning) of the Palo 
Alto Municipal Code (PAMC) to Temporarily Extend Ineligibility of Certain 
Uses to Participate in the University Avenue In-lieu Parking Program.” 
(FIRST READING: May 11, 2020 PASSED: 4-3). 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEMS 3, 5-6:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM 4:  6-1 Kou no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM 7:  4-3 Kniss, Fine, Tanaka no 
Council Member Kou stated that Agenda Item Number 4 deserves a 
discussion. 
Council took a break from 7:15 P.M. and returned at 7:30 P.M.  
City Manager Comments 
 
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager provided an update  regarding Palo Alto (City) 
business. The County of Santa Clara released a Revised Risk Reduction Order 
as related to moving into the Orange Tier for the Coronavirus (COVID-19) 
Pandemic. Red Tier requirements were still be in place for outdoor/indoor 
gatherings and indoor dining. New testing dates for COVID-19 at the Palo Alto 
Art Center were October 9 and  23, 2020, November 6, and 20, 2020 and 
December 4 and 18, 2020. Neighborhood playgrounds were expected to open 
up on October 9, 2020, and signage was going to be posted stating pandemic 
rules. The Magical Bridge Playground was not going to be open. The Palo Alto 
Art Center was reopening on October 6, 2020, with its Glass Gallery and the 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
main gallery opening on November 3, 2020. A new outdoor art exhibit was 
installed along Embarcadero Road. The Bike Bridge over Highway 101 was 
being installed, which was going to result in road closures in the evening. The 
California Avenue Garage construction continued with a completion date of 
late October or November 2020.  
Council Member Cormack asked when the Magical Bridge Playground was 
going to open.  
Mr. Shikada answered that it was an ongoing conversation and no timeframe 
was set as of yet.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired about struggling businesses located within 
City-owned properties. 
Mr. Shikada noted that the City was offering deferrals as a matter of course 
and there was interest among tenants for forgiveness of missed rent. Staff 
planned to bring this to the Council soon. 
Action Items 
8. 
PUBLIC HEARING/LEGISLATIVE: Adoption of Several Ordinances 
Regarding Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units 
Amending Palo Alto Municipal Code Titles 16 (Building) and 18 (Zoning); 
Amendments Include Repealing Section 18.42.040 (Accessory and 
Junior Accessory Dwelling Units) and Adding a new Chapter 18.09 
(Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units); and 
Updating Chapters 18.04 (Definitions), 16.58 (Development Impact 
Fees), 16.04 (California Building Code), 16.06 (California Residential 
Code), and 16.14 (California Green Building Standards Code). 
Environmental Assessment: Exempt From Review Under the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Pursuant to Public Resources Code 
Section 21080.17 and CEQA Guidelines Sections 15061(b)(3), 
15282(h), 15301, 15302 and 15305 (CONTINUED FROM AUGUST 17, 
2020). 
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning and Development Services expressed 
appreciation to Staff who worked on this item. The Interim Accessory Dwelling 
Unit (ADU) Ordinance that passed by the City Council (Council) in January 
2020 expired at the end of January 2021. Palo Alto (City) issued 146 ADU 
permits since 2015 with Final Permits issued for 84 of those projects. The 
State's expectation was for the City to meet their market-rate housing 
production in the course of the City’s Regional Housing Needs Assessment 
(RHNA) Cycle. If the City failed to meet their market-rate housing numbers, 
Senate Bill 35 (SB 35) was to kick in, which included a 10 percent Inclusionary 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Requirement. The ADU production counted toward market-rate RHNA 
numbers. The City did extensive community outreach, which helped Staff 
update and provide recommendations for the City’s ADU Ordinance. Staff 
recommended restructuring Section 18.09.030 and Section 18.09.040 of the 
Ordinance to facilitate easier readability and understanding. Section 
18.09.030 listed State-recognized exemption standards and Section 
18.09.040 explained standards for ADUs that did not meet State exceptions. 
Proposed changes to the Ordinance were for the City to grant an 800-square 
foot exemption to ADUs without regard to the existing floor area available on 
the site. Similar revisions were to take place for Junior Accessory Dwelling 
Units (JADU) with a 500-square foot exemption. One parcel had the option to 
have the main dwelling unit, an ADU, and a JADU on site but the exemption 
was not accumulative. Another change was to not make a distinction between 
an attached and detached JADU. Any two-story ADU that was not by-right 
exempted had to follow the City’s privacy and tree protection regulations. For 
a garage conversion to a JADU, the City required replacement parking, but it 
was able to be uncovered. Noise generating equipment needed to comply with 
the City’s Noise Ordinance and the last proposed change was to remove the 
Deed Restriction Process for ADUs. Changes to the Building Code included 
changes that made it easier for Staff to facilitate the conversion of garages or 
other accessory structures to a dwelling unit and technical details about types 
of construction. The Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) was in 
support of Staff’s recommendations as well as being interested in how ADUs 
were used as affordable housing units.  
Public Hearing opened at 8:05 P.M. 
Jessica Resmini runs the ADU Collective in Palo Alto and urged the Council to 
adopt the recommendations so that the City was able to move forward tackling 
the problem of housing.  
Randy Popp stated that the ADU Task Force helped Staff with the ordinance 
but still had other recommendations. Key items included alignment with the 
Government Code, ADUs that are two-stories and subterranean construction, 
minimal increases to non-conforming structures, utility connects and the 
Green Building Requirements.  
John Kelley complemented Staff for their hard work on incorporating resident’s 
recommendations and addressing concerns. He echoed support for the 
previous speaker’s comments. He urged the Council to approve a greater 
maximum square foot for ADUs.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
1408****409 commented that a discussion needed to take place regarding 
the 4 foot maximum setback for ADUs and if that would be applied to the 
street side lot line for corner lots. 
Roy Maydan agreed with a previous speaker that three issues needed to be 
addressed. Those included allowing an ADU to use the same sewer line that 
the existing house uses, Green Building Requirements and the location of 
HVAC equipment.  
Drew Hudacek reported that studies have shown that ADUs are the most 
effective way to produce housing in California. More housing was able to be 
achieved if the City’s Ordinance aligned with the State’s Ordinance. 
Linnea Wickstrom supported any action taken by Council that allowed the 
City’s Ordinance to align with the State’s Ordinance. She concurred with the 
comments about allowing an ADU to use the existing homes sewer line.  
Jon Anderson has to have a new sewer line put in for his ADU and requested 
the Council allow for an ADU to use the existing home’s sewer line. Also, if 
someone installed a ductless HVAC, he wondered if that could that be located 
closer to the unit instead of in the middle of the property.  
Rebecca Eisenberg agreed with many of the comments previous speakers 
have mentioned and supported the adoption of Staff’s recommended changes.  
Lisa Van Dusen declared that it was very hard to build an ADU with current 
regulations. 
Rohin Ghosh commented that building more ADUs was essential to the City’s 
housing solutions and supported efforts to streamline ADUs. 
Kyle Harrison reminded the Council of the current Housing Code for 
Substandard Lots which prohibited those lots from having a second story. If 
ADUs were able to build a second story, homes on substandard lots needed to 
be able to too.  
Eric Stein encouraged the Council to make a timely decision on the Ordinance. 
Daniel Garber supported and requested that Council approve the ADU Task 
Force’s additional recommendations. 
Curtis Smolar disclosed support for the ADU Task Force’s recommendations 
and supported all of Staff’s recommendations.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Kelsey Banes urged the Council to rethink and support two-story ADUs. She 
cautioned against prohibiting a homeowner from maxing out their home and 
then building an ADU.  
Marie di Pasquale thought the City should not require homeowners to do a 
third-party Green Building verification.  
JaWen Hernandez felt that utility connection for ADUs needed to be regulated 
from the standpoint of functionality. 
Raven Malone echoed that more ADUs need to be built and regulations needed 
to be relaxed to encourage production.  
Public Hearing closed at 8:39 P.M. 
Mayor Fine mentioned that the public needed to send any emails regarding 
Agenda topics to the email City.Council@cityofpaloalo.org so that Staff was 
able to see and respond to the emails. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager relayed that all emails sent to that email were 
included in the Council’s Packet as well as posted online.  
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if Staff’s recommendations were consistent with 
State Law.  
Mr. Lait confirmed that was correct.  
Vice Mayor DuBois requested clarification on how many ADUs were allowed on 
a property. 
Mr. Lait commented that a parcel was able to have one ADU, one JADU, and 
an existing residence.  
Vice Mayor DuBois questioned if any regulations prevented an ADU from being 
used as a home office.  
Mr. Lait answered no. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney noted that there were restrictions and regulations 
on running a business in a residential neighborhood. 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to know if the regulation of “no short-term rentals” 
was State Law. 
Ms. Stump confirmed.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired how that was enforced.  
Garrett Sauls, Associate Planner mentioned that Planning and Transportation 
Commissioner Summa asked the same question and there was no practice in 
place on how Staff was going to verifying the use of the space. 
Mr. Lait summarized that it was tracked based on complaints.  
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested that Deed Restrictions needed to stay in place 
and that it did not need to be finalized until the final inspection of the ADU 
was complete.  
Mr. Lait said the Council was able to provide direction to Staff, but Deed 
Restrictions were often not thought of and caused last-minute scrambling for 
Staff. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to know what was holding up the pre-
approved designs.  
Mr. Lait reported that was part of the Senate Bill 2 Grand funding and Staff 
was working through the process of developing the designs.  
Council Member Cormack inquired what the sentence meant that read Staff 
proposed restructuring the Cool Roof and Recycle Content Requirements from 
Green Building prescriptive, which was mandatory, to an elective for Tier 1 
Projects. 
Mr. Lait reported that some Green Building Regulations were rolled back in 
response to challenges folks were having with building ADUs and that sentence 
reflected that change.  
Evon Ballash, Assistant Building Official summarized that Staff relaxed the 
requirements in the Green Building Ordinance for Cool Roofs for existing 
structures and ADUs.  
Council Member Filseth reiterated that if a 2,500 square foot house was built 
and then the homeowner stated that part of the home was a JADU, then the 
homeowner was able to essentially build a 3,000 square foot house.  
Mr. Lait concurred.  
Mr. Sauls explained that a homeowner was not able to build a 3,000-square 
foot home because the nuance was what was being used as the unit and what 
was being used as the primary residence.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Council Member Kniss asked how many ADUs were built and used within the 
City.  
Mr. Sauls commented that since 2015, 84 ADUs had Final Permits from the 
City.  
Mr. Lait restated that the City did not track if the ADU were being used and 
for what purpose. 
Council Member Kniss inquired if the taxes on an ADU were different from 
Property Taxes.  
Mr. Lait noted that just the new construction was going to be assessed.  
Council Member Kniss questioned if the City was gaining ground in regard to 
the housing crisis by allowing ADUs to be built.  
Mr. Lait stated yes. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to know if basements were allowed for ADUs. 
Mr. Lait confirmed that the Proposed Ordinance did not allow any portion of 
an ADU to be underground.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired as to why that was so. 
Mr. Lait specified that many ADUs were located within side yards and the City 
was concerned about tree preservation. Basements were not allowed outside 
of the buildable footprint. 
Mr. Sauls echoed Mr. Lait’s comment that Council was able to decide to allow 
or not allow ADUs to have basements.  
Michael Alcheck, Planning and Transportation Commission (P&TC) Member 
mentioned that the P&TC did not recommend the ADUs include using 
basements. In the P&TC’s Staff Report some regulations were not fully 
analyzed by Staff and that included two-story ADUs, allowance of basements 
and incorporating the Green Building Program. Due to Staff not having fully 
analyzed those items, the P&TC wanted more time to review them. 
Ms. Stump asked Staff to clarify where basements were allowed on a lot.  
Mr. Lait summarized that if the basement was located within the buildable 
footprint as allowed for a single-family dwelling, an ADU was able to have a 
basement. If the detached ADU was outside of the buildable footprint, no 
basement was allowed.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Council Member Tanaka supported allowing ADUs to have basements.  
Council Member Kou restated that a JADU was able to extend into the existing 
dwelling’s setbacks. 
Mr. Lait added that if a person was building within the single-family guideline, 
all required setbacks applied to an Attached ADU and JADU.  
Albert Yang, Assistant City Attorney clarified that an attached or detached ADU 
was able to be built to encroach into the setback by 4 feet, but special 
exemptions no longer applied to the project.  
Council Member Kou appreciated Staff’s recommendations in terms of 
preserving the neighborhood and the trees. She inquired how the City was 
handling non-conforming ADUs. 
Mr. Lait explained that the City found out about non-conforming units through 
resident complaints. Code Enforcement was to work with those units until they 
complied with State Law.  
Council Member Kou inquired how the City was tracking ADUs that were being 
used for Airbnbs. 
Mr. Lait noted that it was complaint-driven.  
Mr. Sauls answered that Staff required specifications of the HVAC unit that 
was being used, which showed what the noise level was for that particular 
unit. Anything that produced a noise level above City requirements, had to 
have a noise analysis conducted.  
Council Member Kou wanted to know if any noise complaints were received 
from neighbors. 
Mr. Lait had not heard of any noise complaints.  
Mayor Fine questioned if the City was allowed to limit ADUs to 800 square feet 
and impose limits for lot coverage, Floor Area Ratio (FAR) and open space.  
Mr. Yang specified that a detached ADU was able to be built over 800 square 
feet. The City had a maximum size of 900 square feet for a 1 bedroom or 
studio ADU and 1,000 square feet for a 2 bedroom ADU. If someone wanted 
to build an 800 square foot ADU, they were going to receive their permit and 
the City was not able to adopt any other regulations.  
Mayor Fine asked why the City required a separate sewer line for an ADU.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Mr. Lait replied that sewer lines were a State issue, not a local issue.  
Council Member Tanaka noted that underground parking was not allowed in 
single-family areas.  
Mr. Lait concurred.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to understand the rationale around not 
allowing underground parking. 
Mr. Lait restated that it was a policy call for the Council.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to know how a corner lot was able to obtain 
an ADU.  
Mr. Sauls reiterated that a detached ADU was able to be placed in a 4 foot 
side and rear setback, which included the secondary street frontage.  
Mr. Yang added that Housing and Community Development (HCD) agreed that 
side yard meant street side yards as well.  
Vice Mayor DuBois emphasized that ADUs were a complicated subject and he 
inquired if a HVAC unit was able to be placed on a property line. 
Mr. Sauls answered no, setbacks applied for the ADU.  
Vice Mayor DuBois expressed concern regarding corner lots and what the 
streetscape was going to look like if an ADU was within the 16 or 20 foot 
setback.  
Mr. Sauls reported that HCD encouraged the City to provide incentives to 
move people away from placing items in the setbacks.  
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired if other cities were having the same issues in terms 
of setbacks.  
Mr. Sauls noted that other jurisdictions said the side yard was a front yard 
and setbacks were protected in those areas. 
Mr. Lait interjected that there were options and ways to address the setback 
encroachments.  
Ms. Stump summarized that those options included the City having litigation 
issues.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Mayor Fine mentioned that the P&TC requested Council direct the Commission 
to continue to study incentives for affordable ADUs.  
Council Member Cormack questioned if any fees were being changed.  
Mr. Sauls restated that Staff’s recommendations were trying to align with 
State Law but Council was able to change the fee amounts.  
Council Member Cormack requested clarification regarding flood zones. 
Mr. Sauls explained that a flood zone required the floor to be raised 2 feet 
above the ground. The Municipal Code stated that there cannot be an increase 
to non-conforming spaces, so the ADU needed a shrunken roof height to 
accommodate the increased floor height.  
Council Member Cormack questioned if there was a design criterion for ADUs 
when it came to Eichler homes. 
Mr. Sauls answered that there were no design criteria for ADUs.  
Council took a break at 9:40 P.M. and returned at 9:48 P.M. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth 
to: 
A. 
Adopt the Ordinances amending Palo Alto Municipal Code Titles 16 
(Building) and 18 (Zoning) to amend regulations for Accessory Dwelling 
Units (ADUs) and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units (JADUs); and 
B. 
Direct the Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) to look at 
deed restricted affordable ADU’s. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the issues regarding corner lots should be referred 
to P&TC as well.  
Vice Mayor Filseth supported having the P&TC review corner lots.  
Mr. Alcheck remarked that the P&TC believed that the Architectural Review 
Board (ARB) should discuss corner lots.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to understand how the Green Building 
Program applied to ADUs.  
Ms. Ballash mentioned that the Green Building Program was part of the 
Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) goals which included Tier 1 and 
Tier 2, which were mandatory for new construction and for additions and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
remodels for residential construction. New residential construction needed to 
comply with Tier Two requirements and ADUs were included in that category;  
Staff has since relaxed those requirements.  
Mr. Lait advised Council to send their Green Building Program Requirements 
item to the P&TC for further review.  
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “Direct Staff to continue 
working with the community, including the ADU Task Force, during the PTC 
process.” (New Part C) 
Council Member Cormack wanted the Utility Advisory Commission (UAC) and 
the ARB to review the flood zone component and Green Building Program. 
Mr. Lait believed the Motion captured that intention.  
Council Member Kou asked how sustainability goals were being met if the 
Green Building Program was now elective.  
Ms. Ballash explained that the ADU Task Force was requesting all Green 
Building requirements be relaxed, which was a policy question for Council.  
Council Member Kou stated that ADUs were counted towards the City’s RHNA 
numbers. 
Mr. Lait confirmed they counted toward the Market Rate Allocation. If a unit 
was deed restricted to affordable housing, the City was able to count that 
toward RHNA as well.  
Council Member Kniss wanted to know if the P&TC could work through some 
of the issues that were raised. 
Mr. Alcheck stated that there was always room to refine an ordinance.  
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded 
by Council Member Filseth to: 
A. 
Adopt the Ordinances amending Palo Alto Municipal Code Titles 16 
(Building) and 18 (Zoning) to amend regulations for Accessory Dwelling 
Units (ADUs) and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units (JADUs); 
B. 
Direct the Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) to look at 
deed restricted affordable ADU’s; and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
C. 
Direct Staff to continue working with the community, including the ADU 
Task Force, during the PTC process. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0  
Mayor Fine asked if the Public Art Program Item needed to be moved to a 
future Council meeting.  
Council Member Kniss wanted to keep it on the Agenda. 
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed. 
Mr. Shikada supported keeping it on the Agenda. 
9. 
Approval of an Extension of the Pilot Phase of the Old Palo Alto 
Residential Preferential Parking Program (RPP) for a Period of Twelve 
Months (CONTINUED FROM SEPTEMBER 14, 2020). 
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official reported Staff was recommending 
that the City Council (Council) extend the Pilot Program for the Old Palo Alto 
Residential Preferential Parking pilot program (RPP) to October 31, 2021. 
Community input was positive but the Coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19) 
made it difficult for Staff to conduct evaluations. In October 2019 the Pilot 
Program was adopted with permits being issued in November 2019. In January 
2020 feedback was received from residents as well as Staff collected 
preliminary parking data. In early spring of 2020,  planned Surveys and 
Occupancy Studies were delayed due to COVID-19, as well as parking 
standards not being established, and traffic patterns being changed 
significantly. Currently, Palo Alto (City) RPP’s were not financially sustainable 
on their own. They did receive a subsidy from Employee Permits not 
specifically located within the neighborhood. Next steps included feedback 
studies, established parking occupancy rates and parking availability 
standards before returning to Council in October 2021. In terms of the 
California Avenue New Parking Garage, Staff was going to bring forward a 
recommendation to the Council at a future meeting to reduce the Employee 
Permits in the Evergreen Park-Mayfield RPP Parking District. 
Neilson Buchanan noted that the Old Palo Alto RPP was simple and straight 
forward. He recommended not extending the program and to continue on the 
originally planned course.  
Chris Robell urged Council to approve the Old Palo Alto RPP as a continuous 
program and to not extent the Pilot Program for another year.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
E Shepard agreed with the prior comments that the program should be made 
a continuous program.  
Rebecca Eisenberg believed that RPP was an extremely important way to make 
sure residents had a safe environment. The pilot was successful and should 
be extended. 
Barbara Carlitz loved the RPP in her neighborhood and expressed that the 
program be revisited when things returned to normal. She supported moving 
the program to a continuous program. 
Chris Merritt asked the Council to accept the program as a permanent 
program.  
Council Member Kou inquired if Staff believed they were able to collect feasible 
parking data during the pandemic.  
Mr. Kamhi mentioned that schools were back in session and businesses were 
opening back up; those components provided conditions that a parking 
evaluation was able to take place. The primary impact the neighborhood 
endured was the Caltrain commuters.  
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to 
direct Staff to return to Council with a Resolution to establish the Old Palo Alto 
Residential Preferential Parking (RPP) Program as an ongoing RPP District.  
Council Member Kou emphasized that the neighbors located within Old Palo 
Alto worked very hard to get RPP established. 
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed with Council Member Kou’s statements and said 
that the neighborhood followed all the rules. His concern, in general, regarding 
RPP was that they were not cost recoverable and that more ADUs increased 
traffic.  
Council Member Kniss asked what the result would be if the neighborhood did 
not need the RPP in another year due to decreased train traffic and the new 
garage opening up. 
Mr. Kamhi explained that the neighbors would vote to determine if the 
program was to continue and if not, they were able to dissolve the program.  
Council Member Kniss inquired what the cost was to set up the district.  
Mr. Kamhi answered it was going to cost around $16,000 to install the signs 
and to remove the signs was not going to be inexpensive.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Council Member Cormack requested a further explanation regarding the 
connection between the California Avenue Parking Garage and the RPP.  
Mr. Kamhi predicted that it did not make sense to spread out Employee 
Permits from Evergreen Park-Mayfield RPP Parking District throughout Old 
Palo Alto. The reduction of Employee Parking Permits in Evergreen Park-
Mayfield RPP Parking District resulted in employee parking spots in the new 
California Avenue Parking Garage.  
Council Member Cormack emphasized that having consistent Parking 
Availability Standards was important and there was a process for a reason.  
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by 
Mayor Fine to extend the pilot phase of the Old Palo Alto Residential 
Preferential Parking (RPP) Program for twelve months ending on October 31, 
2021. 
Council Member Cormack noted that there was spillover traffic to other blocks 
and advised Staff to investigate that.  
Mayor Fine supported Staff’s recommendation due to Staff not being able to 
collect good parking data because of COVID-19. The California Avenue Parking 
Garage as well as changes to Caltrain were going to have an impact on the 
RPP He believed that the process of pulling an item off the Consent Calendar 
was not a good process.  
Council Member Filseth agreed that establishing a Citywide Standard and then 
having all RPP Programs follow the same standards was a good process. The 
RPP process needed to continue as is until Council decided how to proceed. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired what Staff learned since the program began.  
Mr. Kamhi said positive feedback was expressed.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired if Staff found ways to make the program 
better. 
Mr. Kamhi replied that by extending the program, Staff had time to evaluate.  
Council Member Tanaka asked if residents had the option to opt-in of the 
program if they wished.  
Mr. Kamhi affirmed. 
Council Member Kniss predicted that the arguments for the pilot to continue 
were stronger than the arguments to make the program permanent.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Council Member Kou felt that if the Program continued as a pilot program, the 
Council was not supporting the residents who worked hard to get the program 
put into place.  
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED:  3-4 DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Tanaka no 
Ms. Stump noted that the item was to come back on the Consent Calendar as 
a Resolution if the main Motion passed. 
MOTION RESTATED:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Vice Mayor 
DuBois to direct Staff to return to Council with a Resolution to establish the 
Old Palo Alto Residential Preferential Parking (RPP) Program as an ongoing 
RPP District. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Fine no 
Ms. Stump commented that the Program was not going to lapse if Staff was 
not able to provide information in time to Council to consider in fall of 2021.  
10. 
Review and Discussion of the City of Palo Alto's Public Art Program, and 
Direct Staff to Either Amend the Municipal Code to Temporarily Suspend 
the One Percent for Public Art in Municipal Projects and/or Private 
Development Projects for two Years, or Provide Other Direction to Staff. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager stated that the Item was a follow-up to the Budget 
deliberations. The program operated under a principle of pooling funds and 
had to run in parallel with the Public Safety Building Public Art. 
Elise DeMarzo, Manager Community Services announced that the Staff’s 
recommendation was to direct Staff to return to Council with an Ordinance to 
amend the Municipal Code to temporarily suspend the 1 Percent for Art in 
municipal projects or private development for 2 years or to provide other 
direction to Staff. Municipal Ordinances were adopted in 1975 creating the 
Visual Arts Jury and establishing the Art in Public Places Program. In 2005 
Palo Alto (City) adopted the 1 Percent Art Policy, in  2014 the City adopted 
the Private Percentage for Art Ordinance and in 2015 the Art Policy was 
changed to an Ordinance. The City held several volunteer intensive community 
engagement art projects as well as smaller public engagement events. The 
four funding sources for the Public Art Program were Maintenance Budget, 
Capital Improvement Projects (CIP) Fund which was 1 Percent for Art in 
Municipal Projects, Public Art Fund and the CIP Fund for Art in Public Places. 
The 1 Percent Art in Municipal Projects carried over year to year and a small 
allocation was set aside for project management that was shared between 
Public Art and the Palo Alto Art Center. Staff explored the future with regard 
to allocating some CIP Funds for the maintenance of new art pieces that were 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
coming online. Future projects that were projected for the Fiscal Year (FY) 
2021 Budget included temporary art at the Public Safety Building construction 
site, Fire Station 4, Newell Street Bridge and the Bike and Pedestrian Projects. 
Upcoming temporary initiatives included Phase One of a Microgrant Project for 
commercial corridors and neighborhoods and temporary murals Phase Two. 
Council approved an annual allocation of $50,000 that was used for temporary 
art projects, which carried over year to year. CIP Fund Art in Public Places only 
applied to projects that were over 10,000 square feet and up to 20 percent of 
the Public Art Fund was used to offset the Public Art Director’s Staff time. The 
Public Art Commission’s (PAC) priorities for FY 2021 was to develop art within 
the City to help aide the City in the recovery of the Coronavirus (COVID-19) 
Pandemic, develop an art project that continued to advance cultural inclusion 
and social and racial equity and to widen and strengthen education and 
advocacy for public art. If public art was suspended, Staff requested 
clarifications on which ordinances were to be suspended, where to draw the 
line on projects and process, and how to handle projects that were currently 
under contract.  
Ben Miyaji emphasized that the Palo Alto Public Art Program brought National 
recognition to the City. He did not support suspending the Public Art 
Ordinances.  
Loren Gordon indicated that the PAC needed funding to advance public art 
projects that encouraged cultural inclusion and social and racial equity. 
Mark Weiss asked if a Private Public Partnerships were to be established to 
make up the funding gaps. 
Raven Malone emphasized that public art was very important and wanted to 
see funding continue.  
Rebecca Eisenberg echoed previous commenters to continue funding public 
art.  
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to not suspend the one percent for public art in municipal projects 
and/or private development projects for two years. 
Council Member Kniss stated that art within the City was vital for residents 
and non-residents.  
Council Member Cormack did not support suspending funding for public art.  
Vice Mayor DuBois predicted that Council will not have to make steep budget 
cuts again and supported leaving the program as is.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Council Member Tanaka disclosed that Sales Tax revenues continued to 
decline and major cuts in vital departments have taken place. He inquired if 
Staff looked into Private-Public Partnerships as a source of funding. 
Mr. Shikada explained that essentially the existing funding was a Private-
Public Partnership already.  
Council Member Tanaka stated that each art project was individually voted on 
by the Council.  
Ms. DeMarzo clarified that the PAC vetted all art projects. If a project was over 
$80,000 then the contract come to Council for approval.  
Council Member Kou asked if the program included art classes or programs 
for kids. 
Ms. DeMarzo confirmed that community engagement projects often included 
families with kids. 
Council Member Kou questioned the outreach the Art Program did.  
Ms. DeMarzo noted that most of the outreach was done through social media 
and advertising through community facilities.  
Mayor Fine wanted to continue to fund the program.   
Council Member Tanaka questioned if it was reasonable to hire local artists or 
non-established artists to provide art to the City at a lower cost.  
Ms. DeMarzo explained that there were a lot of different types of art projects 
with varying levels of artists.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to know what the impact was if funding was 
cut to half a percent instead of the full 1 percent.  
Ms. DeMarzo reported that projects that were coming in were going to be 
affected for years to come or not be built at all. 
Mr. Shikada recalled that larger surrounding cities were at a 2 percent funding 
level for public art. 
Ms. DeMarzo confirmed that was correct and 1 percent was standard.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired if bigger cities reduced their art budgets. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/05/2020 
Ms. DeMarzo noted that cities were allocating more funding for public art 
recently to help the community recover from COVID-19.  
Molly Stump, City Attorney cautioned that the conversation was moving away 
from the Agenda Item topic.  
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Mayor Fine reported that Council Member Kniss, Council Member Cormack and 
himself dissolved the Business Support Ad Hoc Committee. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:37 P.M. 
