CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 28 
Special Meeting 
November 09, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in Virtual 
Teleconference at 5:01 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Special Orders of the Day 
1. 
Resolution 9921 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Expressing Appreciation to Jon Hospitalier Upon his Retirement.”   
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director, reported Mr. Hospitalier progressed 
through multiple job titles during his career with the City and was a trusted 
and respected professional.  Mr. Hospitalier's work occurred behind the scenes 
to keep much of the City's infrastructure running.  Mr. Hospitalier had a 
passion for emergency preparedness and worked closely for some time with 
the Office of Emergency Services (OES). 
Ken Dueker, OES Chief, advised that Mr. Hospitalier was going to be missed 
both personally and professionally.  He wished Mr. Hospitalier all the best in 
his retirement.   
Mayor Fine read the Resolution into the record. 
Council Member Kou thanked Mr. Hospitalier for his many years of service to 
the City and wished him a happy retirement. 
Council Member Kniss appreciated Mr. Hospitalier's service in a department 
that sometimes did not receive due recognition. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to adopt the Resolution Expressing Appreciation to Jon Hospitalier 
Upon his Retirement. 
Council Member Cormack thanked Mr. Hospitalier for contributing to the clean 
up of the 1998 flood and for serving as a model of continuous improvement. 
Mayor Fine remarked that Mr. Hospitalier lived up to his name by taking care 
of the City and its residents. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0  
Jon Hospitalier, Public Works Assistant Director, appreciated the Council 
acknowledging his service.  Working with so many highly qualified team 
members was an honor.  The Public Services Division collaborated with all 
departments to provide services that often were not noticed.  As he moved 
onto the next stage of his life, he wished everyone well and thanked the City 
for the many opportunities.   
Closed Session 
1A.  CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY - EXISTING LITIGATION  
Subject: NAACP, et al. v. City of Palo Alto, United States District Court, 
Northern District of California, Case No. 5:20-cv-07251-EJD  
(Foothills Park)  
Authority: Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(1). 
Carlin Otto noted the average daily attendance at Foothills Park was 416.  With 
Foothills Park open to the public, attendance was going to exceed 1,000 on 
most days.  The Council needed to implement a sustainable maximum daily 
visitor limit.   
Aram James urged the Council to open Foothills Park to the public.   
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:25 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:14 P.M. 
Mayor Fine announced no reportable action. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor Fine announced Agenda Item Number 14, “PUBLIC HEARING / QUASI-
JUDICIAL / LEGISLATIVE. 788 San Antonio Road [19PLN-00079]: The City 
Council Will Consider: 1) Adoption of a Resolution Certifying a Final 
Environmental Impact Report (EIR), Making CEQA Findings Including a 
Statement of Overriding Considerations, and Adopting a Mitigation Monitoring 
and Reporting Plan…”, was continued to November 16, 2020. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Oral Communications 
Jonathan Erman was appalled that the City was not able to negotiate pay 
reductions with labor unions when so many people did not have incomes.   
Barry Hart noted a neighbor was killed this week while crossing the street in 
a crosswalk.  The City needed to reevaluate pedestrian safety in Palo Alto 
given the number of pedestrians using the street to social distance and 
darkness falling earlier.   
Terry Holzemer expressed disappointment with the Council decision regarding 
Boards, Commissions, and Committees the prior week.  The hour was too late 
for public comment and rational thought.   
Minutes Approval 
2. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the October 26, 2020 City Council 
Meeting. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
approve the Action Minutes for the October 26, 2020 City Council Meeting. 
MOTION PASSED  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Clara Chang, addressing Agenda Item Number 9, thanked the City for the 
honor and privilege of operating the program. 
Greg Welch, addressing Agenda Item Number 5, encouraged the Council to 
approve the project as proposed. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to approve Agenda Item Numbers 3-10. 
3. 
Approval of a Memorandum of Agreement Between the San Francisco 
Bay Restoration Authority and the US Army Corps of Engineers to Utilize 
Resources of the Bay Restoration Regulatory Integration Team (BRRIT) 
for Pre-permit Application Review and Permit Processing for the Palo 
Alto Horizontal Levee Pilot Project at no Cost to the City.  
4. 
Approval of Contract Number C21179815 With Daleo, Inc. in the Amount 
of $6,417,876 for Gas Main Replacement Project 23 (GS-13001) in the 
Evergreen, Ventura, College Terrace, Research Park, Greer Tract, 
Midtown, and Charleston Terrace Neighborhoods; and Authorization for 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
the City Manager to Negotiate and Execute Related Change Orders Not-
to-Exceed $641,788, for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $7,059,644.  
5. 
Approval of a Traffic Calming Pilot Project and Related Improvements in 
the Crescent Park Neighborhood.  
6. 
Approval of Amendment Number 2 to Contract Number S15153692 With 
Woodard & Curran as Successor-in-Interest to RMC Water & 
Environment for Long Range Facilities Plan Program Management 
Services at the Regional Water Quality Control Plant, and to Extend the 
Contract Term Through December 31, 2022.  
7. 
Approval of a $500,000 Net Zero Budget Amendment in the General 
Fund for the Planning & Development Services Department’s Cost 
Recovery Program for Private Development Studies.  
8. 
Approval of Contract Number C21178949 With Avenidas, Inc. for the 
Provision of Comprehensive Services to Older Adults for Five-years in 
an Amount Not-to-Exceed $2,626,165.  
9. 
Approval of Contract Number C21178948 With Palo Alto Community 
Child Care for Five-years for Management of the City’s Child Care 
Subsidy Program in an Amount Not-to-Exceed $2,660,556.  
10. 
Policy and Services Committee Recommends Council Accept the 
Proposed 2020 National Community Survey and Process. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported the County of Santa Clara (County) urged 
the public to adhere to safety protocols due to the increase in COVID-19 cases.  
Free COVID-19 tests were planned to be administered on November 20.  The 
community needed to obtain free flu shots.  A Public Safety Community 
Meeting was scheduled for November 17, 2020.  The City website listed 
opportunities for the community to volunteer on Veterans Day.  The next 
monthly community check-in regarding Uplift Local Community was scheduled 
for November 17, 2020.   
Action Items 
11. 
Discussion and Potential Direction on Community and Economic 
Recovery Strategies Including Uplift Local Holiday Promotions, Business 
Support Activities, and Testing; and A) Expanding the Definition of Retail 
and Retail-like to Allow More Diverse Retail Activities; B) Temporarily or 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Permanently Altering Parking Requirements for a Change of Use; C) 
Temporarily Suspending the Retail Preservation Ordinance in Some 
Areas of Palo Alto; and D) Continuing Closures of Portions of California 
and University Avenues to Vehicular Traffic.  
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported the item responded to the Council's 
September 14, 2020 direction to Staff and focused on ways to help businesses 
recover more quickly from the economic recession.  Staff sought direction 
regarding a set of concepts.  On October 19, 2020, the Council discussed a 
Community and Economic Recovery Strategy and initial efforts under way in 
the City.  Staff planned to return to the Council on November 30, 2020 with a 
Study Session for community and economic recovery. 
Rachael Tanner, Assistant Director of Planning and Community Environment, 
advised that Staff sought direction about expanding the definition of retail and 
retail-like uses, temporarily or permanently altering parking requirements for 
a change of use, temporarily suspending the Retail Preservation Ordinance in 
some areas, and continuing the closure of portions of California Avenue and 
University Avenue to vehicular traffic.  Santa Clara County's COVID-19 risk 
level was currently moderate, and some indoor business operations were 
allowed with modifications.  The City offered a community clinic for testing 
twice a month.  The use of rapid testing was cost prohibitive for the City.  The 
Uplift Local Program was intended to support local residents and businesses 
with a website, signage and banners, and events and activities.  Allowing more 
diverse uses in retail areas included modernizing definitions, making discrete 
adjustments to allow additional uses, and decreasing regulatory barriers for 
compatible and desirable uses.  Staff was not proposing general office uses 
on the ground floor.  Constraints for the Council to consider were the duration 
of diverse uses and limits on the allowable sizes of uses.  Town & Country 
Shopping Center intended to request a Zoning Code text amendment to allow 
20 percent of ground-floor space to be occupied by medical office uses and a 
limit of 30 percent on office uses at the site.  Staff offered two approaches for 
providing more flexibility and facilitating existing commercial spaces: 
temporarily suspending onsite parking requirements for changes of use; and 
developing a permanent blended parking ratio for all commercial uses.  The 
Council needed to consider short-term economic challenges with potentially 
long-term changes; a temporary approach versus a comprehensive strategy; 
and total relief versus reduced relief from onsite parking requirements.  The 
Council may consider temporarily suspending the Retail Preservation 
Ordinance in Downtown Palo Alto, California Avenue, and Middlefield Road 
areas.  Staff recommended the Council extend street closures for University 
and California Avenues through March 31, 2021 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Mr. Shikada noted an at-places memorandum provided information regarding 
current vacancies for retail space and public feedback.  The Council had the 
discretion to work on any or all of the proposals.   
Hamilton Hitchings requested the Council not allow professional office, medical 
and dental, financial services, and adult education uses to replace allowed 
retail uses in core areas.   
Winter Dellenbach remarked that suspending the Retail Preservation 
Ordinance was unworkable and unrealistic because the consequences were 
permanent.  The City needed to continue supporting the mom-and-pop retail 
businesses along El Camino Real in South Palo Alto.   
Jessica Roth expressed concern about the impacts of changing retail uses on 
University and California Avenues.  Public art was needed.  She supported 
continued closure of California Avenue.   
Jonathan Erman noted the discussion did not include the performing arts, 
which were a major part of the Uplift Local Program and were closed.  Safety 
protocols were not applied equally to all gatherings, and the City needed to 
change that.   
Faith Bell stated requirements for ground-floor retail were essential for a 
vibrant Downtown and for businesses to survive.  The idea of temporarily 
suspending the requirements was ludicrous.  Reducing parking requirements 
was unfair to the businesses that paid hundreds of thousands of dollars in in-
lieu parking fees.  More signage was needed.   
Terry Holzemer opposed any change to the Retail Preservation Ordinance and 
parking requirements.  A variety of businesses was needed to create a viable 
and vibrant commercial area.   
Karen Holman opposed any change to retail and parking requirements.  The 
City needed an Economic Development Director. 
James Ellis appreciated Staff's proactive approach to economic recovery.  The 
pandemic accelerated trends for retailers.  Town & Country Shopping Center's 
proposed amendment to the Zoning Code was intended to update the Zoning 
Code and address the changing retail environment.   
John Shenk, Thoits Brothers, believed Palo Alto needed to be open to all 
retailers that served the public.  Tenants and landlords needed to feel 
confident that investments in existing stores would provide benefits in the 
future.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Michael Ekwall suggested the closure of California Avenue extend through 
Memorial Day of 2021 and the Council consider making portions of California 
Avenue pedestrian only.  The Council needed to protect all existing businesses 
on California Avenue. 
Steven Sinchek commented that filling vacant spaces was going to be positive 
and helpful.  Closing University Avenue benefited his restaurant.  Restaurants 
needed to know the street closures were going to extend to Memorial Day 
before investing in heaters and tents for outdoor dining.   
Jim Jurkovich opposed changes to the Retail Preservation Ordinance.  Retail 
businesses needed incentives.  Introducing uses other than retail caused rents 
to increase.   
Council took a break at 7:40 P.M. and returned at 7:52 P.M. 
Mayor Fine requested Council Members discuss street closures first. 
Council Member Kniss felt rapid testing for COVID-19 was going to be less 
expensive and needed to be done.  If restaurants invested in their business, 
the City needed to invest in street closures through May 2021.   
Council Member Filseth supported continuing street closures through at least 
March 31, 2021 and potentially Memorial Day.   
Vice Mayor DuBois noted some California Avenue retailers were concerned 
about pedestrians walking in the street rather than on the sidewalk and about 
restaurants' equipment being stored in front of stores and blocking traffic.  
Perhaps, the Council needed to consider opening portions of University Avenue 
and reconfiguring outdoor dining on California Avenue.   
Mayor Fine remarked that Staff tried many variations of the street closures in 
an effort to assist businesses.  Retailers' experiences with street closures were 
different from restaurants' experiences.   
Council Member Kou agreed with ensuring pedestrians used the sidewalks on 
University and California Avenues.  She wanted to understand the traffic 
circulation on and around University Avenue before supporting extended 
closure.  The Council needed to consider a specific date for extending street 
closures and charging a fee for the use of public space. 
Council Member Cormack advised that the Uplift Local signage was helpful.  
Extending street closures and authorizing staff to make nuanced changes were 
appropriate.  Residents were uniformly thrilled with the closure of University 
and California Avenues.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about Staff's plans to fast track approval of 
outdoor heating and tents. 
Ms. Tanner indicated Staff published guidelines for preparing for weather.  
According to guidelines, at least two sides of a covering had to be open, which 
allowed heat to dissipate rapidly.  Indoor dining was allowed at 25 percent of 
usual capacity.   
Council Member Tanaka asked about plans for marketing local businesses. 
Meghan Horrigan-Taylor, Chief Communications Officer, reported Staff was 
working on a number of advertising campaigns, rebranding, and signage. 
Mr. Shikada added that Staff asked businesses to assist with the content of 
marketing efforts related to holidays.   
Mayor Fine noted street closures were one of the City's most popular 
programs.  Extending the program through March 2021 would provide the 
incoming Council with data. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
extend the closures of portions of California Avenue and University Avenue to 
vehicular traffic until March 31, 2021. 
Mr. Shikada interpreted the Motion as allowing Staff to evaluate small changes 
to the program.   
Council Member Cormack believed there was interest in closing two blocks of 
California Avenue permanently.   
Council Member Tanaka appreciated Staff's experiments with the program and 
proposed implementing a single, one-way lane in the middle of University and 
California Avenues; placing Farmers Market booths back-to-back in the center 
of the street; and offering incentives on slow days.   
Mr. Shikada related that resolving the conflict between California Avenue 
businesses and the Farmers Market was a challenge.  Extending street 
closures through the end of May 2021 was not a challenge.   
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired regarding current traffic on Hamilton and Lytton 
compared to pre-COVID traffic. 
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, indicated Staff collected traffic 
data, but he did not have it at the current time. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Ms. Tanner reported traffic on streets other than University Avenue returned 
to pre-COVID levels or higher as of October 26-31, 2020.   
Vice Mayor DuBois preferred to open University Avenue for December and the 
rainy season.  The Farmers Market drew a lot of people to California Avenue.  
He encouraged Staff to direct pedestrian traffic to sidewalks and to experiment 
with opening sections of streets in an effort to benefit retailers.   
Council Member Kniss believed restaurants wanted an extension to Memorial 
Day in order to justify equipment expenses. 
Council Member Cormack hesitated to extend the program beyond March 31, 
2021 because a vaccine may be available in the second quarter of 2021.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to extend the closure until May 31, 2021.  
Council Member Kou wanted assurances that Staff's variations were fair to 
retailers and that the speeds of bicycles and micro-mobility devices were safe 
for pedestrians and waitstaff. 
Mr. Shikada requested specific issues be directed to Staff for follow up with 
the businesses.  Staff would attempt to mitigate safety concerns for sidewalk 
users. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to extend the closures of portions of California Avenue and University 
Avenue to vehicular traffic until May 31, 2021. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-1 DuBois no 
Mayor Fine requested comments regarding expanding the definitions of retail 
and retail-like uses. 
Council Member Filseth questioned whether uses were converting to 
restaurants, which were a parking-intense use, under the health orders.  
Suspending parking requirements for a change of use did not address 
additional parking needed for the new use.  Blended parking strategies that 
did not increase parking supply were probably not going to be helpful.  Staff 
seemed to be focusing on reducing dependency on retail, especially traditional 
retail, rather than supporting retail.  He did not want to make big strategy 
decisions in the middle of a COVID-19 discussion.  He wanted to hear plans to 
help businesses now.  Retail areas in the City were different and needed to be 
treated differently.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Council Member Kniss noted Exhibit 3, the list of vacant storefronts, contained 
more than 50 locations.  She requested assistance with interpreting the list. 
Mr. Shikada characterized the list as data.  The graph in the at-places memo 
depicted actual vacancy rates for Downtown and Palo Alto from 2010 through 
2018.   
Council Member Kniss did not believe the vacancy rate was increasing 
dramatically. 
Mr. Shikada suggested a vacancy rate of 10 percent was a dramatic increase.  
With eviction moratoriums in place, very few if any businesses were paying 
full rent. 
Council Member Cormack supported Council consideration of food preparation 
and/or food manufacturing uses.  She inquired regarding changes needed to 
allow more uses in more areas of the City. 
Ms. Tanner explained that different uses were allowed in different areas of the 
City.  Some uses were allowed principally permitted and some were allowed 
with Conditional Use Permits.  Financial services and medical office uses fell 
into those categories depending on the location and restrictions. 
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning and Community Environment, emphasized 
the need for Conditional Use Permits in some areas. 
Council Member Cormack was not prepared to propose or support any changes 
without detailed information about requirements and restrictions. 
Ms. Tanner clarified that Staff hoped to obtain a list of topics the Council was 
interested in exploring.   
Council Member Cormack remarked that food preparation and/or food 
manufacturing uses needed to be distributed across the City.  Mental health 
professionals were challenged to find and retain office space in Palo Alto.  
Medical services were a need, and medical providers were the largest 
employers in Palo Alto.  She needed more information to determine whether 
medical office uses should be distributed or concentrated in the City.  She 
wanted to talk about educational uses.  There were some possibilities for 
financial services uses. 
Mayor Fine commented that the density of office and retail uses was expected 
to decrease, which may impact parking.  The Council needed to consider safe 
practices that helped businesses remain open and operating.  An Economic 
Development Manager was a good idea, but the expense was a consideration.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
The City's permitting process was onerous and had to be changed.  Food uses 
could be distributed Citywide.  Small pockets of medical and dental offices 
existed around the City.  Educational uses should be located near 
neighborhoods.  Financial services and professional office uses needed to be 
targeted to the downtowns.   
Vice Mayor DuBois referred to policies and goals in the business and economic 
section of the Comprehensive Plan.  Staff's proposals were Citywide and did 
not make sense.  Other cities were making changes to support local 
businesses, but not large-scale zoning changes.  The County of Santa Clara 
(County) was working on a business grant program.  Perhaps the Council 
needed to consider a California Avenue Business Improvement District (BID), 
allowing businesses to use only the windows of vacant storefronts, and 
community programs to help retailers.  It was time for the City to hire or retain 
a economic development planner.  The Retail Preservation Ordinance was 
intended to protect ground-floor retail spaces.  Retail sales for brick-and-
mortar shops continued to dwarf online sales.  To succeed, retail uses needed 
a retail environment.  The Council needed data to understand the choices.  
The Staff Report acknowledged the long-term effects of potential changes.  He 
was not interested in making large changes at the current time but looking at 
changes for core shopping areas and possibly secondary areas.  Food 
preparation uses should not be located in retail areas.  Medical office uses 
should be focused in secondary retail locations.  Educational and financial 
services uses belonged outside core retail districts.  General office uses did 
not contribute to a retail environment.  The Council needed to prioritize 
community-serving services.   
Council Member Kou commented on the need for more local businesses and 
services.  An economic development manager would pay for himself.  A 
campaign to encourage residents to support each other and to invest in the 
local community had to be purposeful.   
Council Member Tanaka explained the retail apocalypse and the implications 
of the vast amount of retail space in the United States.  Staff's approach was 
correct.  Big-box retailers were doing well during the pandemic, but small 
specialty retailers were suffering.  The City did not have the expertise and 
nimbleness to curate retail areas.  There probably was not space or the desire 
for big-box retailers in Palo Alto; therefore, the City needed to think about 
foot-traffic generators.   
Council Member Kniss felt this was a land-use discussion, and the Planning 
and Transportation Commission (PTC) needed to review these topics. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Council Member Cormack noted the community valued educational uses, and 
locating them throughout the City was appropriate.  Residents used financial 
services located in their neighborhoods.  Hiring or retaining an Economic 
Development Manager was logical.  She inquired regarding the success of the 
blended parking rate in Downtown for various constituencies. 
Ms. Tanner reported it was working fairly well from a planning entitlement 
perspective.  The in-lieu parking fee was sometimes a challenge.   
Council Member Cormack asked if it met the needs of Downtown residents. 
Ms. Tanner indicated the City met residents' needs through the Residential 
Preferential Parking Permit (RPP) Program.  The parking ratio for residential 
buildings was different from the blended parking rate for commercial 
buildings. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested secondary streets were appropriate locations for 
food manufacturing uses.  Pre-COVID-19, parking demand exceeded supply 
in Downtown.  A parking in-lieu fee was not beneficial for a business that was 
not paying its rent.  The Council needed to review past recessions and discuss 
expectations for the current recession.   
Council Member Filseth questioned whether a lack of space or other factors 
were the challenge for community-serving businesses.  Macro trends and foot-
traffic generators did not apply to every area in every city.  He favored 
contracting with an economic development firm with serious expertise in 
retail. 
Mayor Fine agreed that the role of an Economic Development Manager had 
not been defined. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to direct 
Staff and the Planning and Transportation Commission to quickly propose 
changes to enable Diverse Retail Uses in more Retail Sites, including: 
A. 
Food, Medical, and Educational uses Citywide; and  
B. 
Financial and Professional Office uses in core commercial areas. 
Mayor Fine noted a need to act quickly and responsibly.  Enabling diverse 
retail uses included parking, signage, and the permitting process.   
Council Member Kniss inquired about including direction for an Economic 
Development Manager in the Motion. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Mr. Shikada recommended Staff return with a scope of services for a contract 
with an Economic Development firm.   
Council Member Kniss believed the Council needed to move quickly on 
streamlining the permitting process.   
Vice Mayor DuBois proposed amending the Motion to read "quickly evaluate 
changes." 
Mayor Fine declined the proposal.  He expected the PTC to evaluate and study 
changes.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, Part A, “or by district.”  
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the core commercial areas were located on 
University Avenue. 
Mayor Fine replied University and California Avenues.   
Vice Mayor DuBois seemed to recall agreement to locate financial and 
professional office uses on secondary streets.   
Mayor Fine did not wish to make that judgment.  He defined core commercial 
areas as Downtown and the California Avenue Business District.  The PTC 
needed to evaluate whether secondary streets or core commercial areas were 
the appropriate location. 
Council Member Kou preferred a retail expert engage the community and 
develop a plan.   
Council Member Cormack did not understand why Part B was appropriate.   
Mayor Fine asked if the issue was financial and professional office uses or the 
geography of core commercial areas. 
Council Member Cormack answered both.   
Mayor Fine proposed amending the Motion to direct the PTC to look at all the 
uses by district.   
Council Member Cormack agreed with combining Parts A and B.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to combine Motion Parts A and B to read, 
“… educational, financial and professional office uses citywide or by district.” 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Council Member Filseth requested a timeframe for the PTC to act quickly. 
Mayor Fine did not have a timeline in mind. 
Council Member Filseth expressed concern about rushing the review.  Changes 
to the Retail Preservation Ordinance needed to be made carefully. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “… and to evaluate ways the 
City can curate a strong retail mix.” 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “… quickly evaluate and 
propose changes … .” 
Council Member Kniss emphasized the need for speed. 
Council Member Kou asked if the Downtown retail vacancy rate and use survey 
was conducted in September. 
Mr. Lait did not know if the survey was conducted in 2020. 
Council Member Kou recommended the survey be provided to the PTC and the 
Council prior to the end of the year. 
Council Member Tanaka concurred with the urgent need for action and 
proposed the Council consider a temporary Ordinance by the end of the 
calendar year. 
Mayor Fine advised that Staff needed several weeks to prepare a 
recommendation.  Council Members agreed with PTC review.  Staff had not 
drafted an Ordinance, and the Council did not have the expertise to draft one. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about Staff's ability to draft an Ordinance for 
some non-contentious changes and present it to the Council. 
Mr. Shikada suggested one area worth exploring was moving conditional uses 
to permitted uses. 
Mr. Lait indicated refining the definition of retail was also a possibility.  He 
requested Council direction with respect to presenting changes to the PTC or 
directly to the Council.   
Mayor Fine asked if the first idea was to waive the Conditional Use Permit 
(CUP) process for permitted uses that required a CUP. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Mr. Lait explained that Staff was going to consider raising the CUP thresholds 
for certain uses so that not every use required a CUP.  Staff would refine the 
definition of retail and focus on the types of uses that were pedestrian or 
neighborhood-serving rather than change the parking standard. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “Direct Staff to return to 
Council with minor adjustments to the definition of what qualifies as a retail 
use and adjust the thresholds for retail CUP uses in order to promote retail 
activity and decrease vacancies.” (New Part B) 
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed that any changes made by the end of the year 
needed to be minor.   
Council Member Filseth requested the Mayor split the vote. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to: 
A. 
Direct Staff and the Planning and Transportation Commission to quickly 
evaluate and propose changes to enable Diverse Retail Uses in more 
retail sites, including food, medical, educational, financial and 
professional office uses citywide or by district, and evaluate ways the 
City can curate a strong retail mix; and 
B. 
Direct Staff to return to Council with minor adjustments to the definition 
of what qualifies as a retail use and adjust the thresholds for retail CUP 
uses in order to promote retail activity and decrease vacancies. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR PURPOSE OF VOTING 
MOTION AS AMENDED PART A PASSED:  7-0  
Council Member Filseth expressed concern that the next Council might want 
to reverse anything the Council changed. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PART B PASSED:  4-3 DuBois, Filseth, Kou no 
Council took a break at 10:12 P.M. and returned at 10:21 P.M. 
Mayor Fine requested comments regarding parking requirements.  He 
requested the rationale for using the blended rate only for Downtown and 
which was easier to implement. 
Ms. Tanner reported a blended rate was easier to implement and administer.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Mr. Lait indicated implementation of the blended rate was related to the 
parking assessment district.  Staff was looking at ways to identify uses that 
aligned with respect to parking.   
Council Member Filseth inquired about a need to update parking standards for 
restaurant and retail uses because parking demand had changed substantially. 
Mr. Lait did not know.  At one time, parking standards were different for the 
California Avenue area and the assessment district.  Time and again, a 
business wanted a retail space on California Avenue, but the property provided 
no onsite parking or the business was not able to pay an in-lieu fee or buy 
into the assessment district.   
Council Member Filseth requested the benefit of allowing a business that 
needed parking to lease a site that provided no parking.   
Mr. Lait clarified that ideally Staff identified a use with the same parking 
requirement as the existing use to replace the existing use.  At the current 
time, intensifying uses on California Avenue was not possible. 
Council Member Filseth requested the location for parking if the Council waived 
the parking requirement for new uses. 
Mr. Lait responded street parking and public parking facilities.   
Council Member Filseth did not believe relaxing parking standards without a 
plan to provide parking was progress.  Evidence that parking requirements 
were too stringent should drive planning for parking.  The parking standard 
was less important than ensuring parking was adequate.   
Ms. Tanner indicated the evidence was based on businesses that failed 
because of parking.   
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired regarding the annual estimate of parking demand 
in Downtown.  At last count, demand exceeded supply by about 1,200 spaces. 
Mr. Kamhi was not familiar with the report, but preparing an estimate was 
possible. 
Vice Mayor DuBois recommended the Council refer the matter to the PTC.  He 
questioned the need to change parking requirements at the current time.  The 
Council did not have sufficient information to make a decision.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the blended rate worked in Downtown 
because the businesses were allowed to pay an in-lieu fee. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Mr. Lait clarified that uses were interchangeable in Downtown without Staff 
having to determine the adequacy of parking prior to approving a new use.  
Many factors other than parking played a role in the ability of a business to 
open in Downtown.   
Council Member Cormack did not oppose a blended rate, but she did not have 
sufficient information to make any changes.   
Mayor Fine noted his motivation for this item was the preponderance of gyms 
and the lack of onsite parking on California Avenue.  Requiring a business to 
pay for offsite parking while the City did not charge for on-street parking was 
ludicrous.  Offices were empty, but traffic on Hamilton and Lytton had returned 
to pre-COVID-19 levels.  Consequently, offices likely did not cause parking 
problems.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired whether referral of parking requirements and 
the blended rate to the PTC was appropriate.   
Mr. Lait noted the Council had not directed Staff to explore an in-lieu fee 
program for the California Avenue area.   
Council Member Tanaka asked what action the Council needed to take to reach 
a solution. 
Mr. Shikada agreed with the proposal to refer the item to the PTC.   
Council Member Filseth stated the real problem was not the blended rate but 
matching supply to demand.  The PTC needed to evaluate whether the blended 
rate accurately matched supply and demand. 
Council Member Kniss suggested office workers commuted into Palo Alto by 
train pre-COVID-19, and the current traffic was coming from elsewhere.   
Mr. Shikada advised that a direct correlation of the two was not possible.   
Vice Mayor DuBois noted traffic on the freeway had picked up as well.   
Council Member Cormack stated people had returned to school. 
Ms. Tanner added that essential workers continued to commute to their jobs.  
Research found people were making more local trips by car. 
Council Member Kou believed implementation of Residential Preferential 
Parking Permit Programs (RPP) was evidence of huge parking problems.  
Changing parking requirements without data was not the way to go. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Mayor Fine requested comment regarding the Retail Preservation Ordinance. 
Council Member Filseth preferred not to discuss changes due to the late hour 
and suggested the Council refer it to the PTC. 
Mayor Fine remarked that requiring ground-floor retail did not promote, 
enable, or protect ground-floor retail.  He disagreed with the Council action to 
apply the Ordinance outside Downtown or California Avenue.  In some 
locations, ground-floor retail was not viable.   
Council Member Cormack concurred with referring the topic to the PTC.   
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to direct 
the Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) to review the geography 
of the Retail Preservation Ordinance in Palo Alto. 
Council Member Filseth believed the PTC was the body best equipped to review 
the Retail Preservation Ordinance. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change the Motion to state, “… Commission to 
evaluate and propose the geography … .” 
MOTION AS AMENDED:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Mayor 
Fine to direct the Planning and Transportation Commission to evaluate and 
propose the geography of the Retail Preservation Ordinance in Palo Alto. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-1 Kou no 
Mayor Fine recommended continuing Agenda Item Number 13 to 
November 16, 2020 due to the time. 
Mr. Lait reported the City's response letter would be submitted after the 
regional meeting but prior to the public notice deadline. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about the time sensitivity of Agenda Item Number 
12. 
Mr. Shikada advised the Council to continue Agenda Item Number 13 as many 
of the issues discussed in Agenda Item Number 11 pertained to Agenda Item 
Number 12. 
Mayor Fine announced the continuation of Agenda Item Number 13 to 
November 16, 2020. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
12. 
Direction to Modify the California Avenue Parking Policy to Expand 
Eligibility for City Garage Parking Permits, Modify the Evergreen Park 
Mayfield Residential Preferential Parking (RPP) Program to Reduce 
Employee Parking in the RPP District, and Develop a Parking In-Lieu 
Program for the California Avenue Business District (Continued From 
October 26, 2020). 
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, reported a significant supply of free 
parking was currently available because commercial parking restrictions were 
not being enforced.  Once restrictions resumed, Staff recommended 
designating upper levels of the California Avenue garage for employee permit 
parking only Monday through Friday until 11:00 A.M. and allowing visitor 
parking on the upper levels after 11:00 A.M.  In addition, Staff recommended 
transitioning 120 employees holding Evergreen Park/Mayfield Residential 
Preferential Permit Parking Program (RPP) permits to the garage and issuing 
California Avenue Business District permits to 228 employees on the waitlist.  
Staff planned to utilize the automated parking guidance technology systems 
to monitor usage trends over time and to adjust visitor and permitholder space 
set-asides.  The parking garage contained approximately 636 parking spaces 
but provided approximately 300 net new parking spaces.  Staff sought 
direction for a California Avenue in-lieu fee program. 
Nate Baird, Parking Manager, advised that the intent of the proposal was to 
balance resident and business input.  Residents wanted to reduce the number 
of Evergreen Park/Mayfield RPP employee permits.  Reduced-price permits 
offered to low-income workers were available for spaces in the Evergreen 
Park/Mayfield RPP only.  Staff planned to present options for expanding the 
program to the Finance Committee at a later date.  Next steps included 
completing the design of garage operations, installing and launching signage 
and wayfinding guidance, restarting commercial time restrictions, and 
community outreach for future parking enhancements.   
B. Beekman understood the Brown Act required the Council to hear public 
comment on an Agenda Item that had not been presented to a committee.  
He wished to address Agenda Item Number 13. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, indicated he was allowed to address Agenda Item 
Number 13 on November 16, 2020. 
Jessica Roth expressed concern about removing employee permits from the 
Evergreen Park/Mayfield RPP and hoped to add the College Terrace RPP to the 
program.  Moving all employee permitholders to the garage eliminated garage 
parking for customers.  She encouraged the Council to think through the types 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
of uses allowed to open on California Avenue in order to maintain the look and 
feel of California Avenue. 
Judy Kleinberg, Chamber of Commerce, indicated the City did not seek input 
from the business community regarding the impact of eliminating employee 
RPP permits in the California Avenue area.  In discussions between Staff and 
California Avenue leaders, the goal of the new garage was always to increase 
area parking to support customer parking.  Any neighborhood dissatisfaction 
with RPP employee permit holders had not been discussed with the business 
community.  She urged the Council to honor the representations and promises 
made to California Avenue businesses.   
Hamilton Hitchings explained that in-lieu parking was not part of the original 
design of the garage.  Staff added a requirement for an extra 200 spaces and 
reduced by half the number of employee permit holders moved from the RPP 
to the garage.  RPP employee permit holders were supposed to be eliminated 
once the garage was complete.  In-lieu parking needed to be tied to specific 
retail and restaurant uses.  The garage was intended to benefit residents and 
businesses.   
Mark Mollineaux believed the garage was a mistake, but moving parking from 
place to place through the RPP was good.   
Rebecca Eisenberg felt the City needed to stop prioritizing the needs of 
commercial developers and office tenants.  Residents of RPPs wanted cars 
removed from the neighborhoods.   
Carol Scott urged the Council to return the recommendation to Staff for 
revision because it failed to accomplish the long-held objectives for the 
garage.  Low-wage workers were not going to receive any space in the new 
garage, and RPP employee permitholders were not going to be removed from 
neighborhoods.   
Terry Holzemer believed it was time to remove employee cars from residential 
neighborhoods and reduce the number of RPP permits sold to employees.  
Access to garage permits was important for low-wage workers.   
Paul Machado asked the Council to open the garage to low-income workers 
and to stop selling RPP permits to employees.   
Michael Ekwall stated there was no outreach to the business community 
regarding the Agenda Item.  The proposal erased any benefit created by the 
garage.  He urged the Council to continue the item. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Council Member Filseth asked if employees could obtain permits to park in 
neighborhoods and Zone G only. 
Mr. Kamhi replied no.  Approximately 900 employees purchased permits to 
park in other garages in the California Avenue Business District.  Employees 
who did not receive permits for the other garages were placed on a waitlist. 
Council Member Filseth requested the number of two-hour and three-hour 
parking spaces located in the California Avenue area. 
Mr. Baird indicated 900 to 1,100 spaces.   
Council Member Filseth asked if there were approximately 540 spaces in the 
other garages and lots. 
Mr. Kamhi replied yes. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the California Avenue garage added 600 
spaces to the California Avenue area. 
Mr. Kamhi answered yes. 
Council Member Filseth asked if Staff had the ability to track the change in 
parking demand caused by changes in uses. 
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning and Community Environment, responded 
yes. 
Council Member Filseth remarked that the in-lieu program was basically 
charging people twice for the capital cost of building parking spaces.  He 
requested the Staff recommendation for visitors who parked for longer than 
two or three hours. 
Mr. Kamhi explained that daily parking permits were available for purchase.  
A pay station was going to be located in the garage for visitors to purchase 
daily permits. 
Council Member Filseth inquired about the number of daily permits sold. 
Mr. Kamhi indicated the number was small.  Staff needed to discuss parking 
demand in the new environment with the Council. 
Council Member Filseth related that his first impression of the Staff 
recommendation was it worked.  The in-lieu program was a red herring.  He 
wanted to see if it still worked after some more calculations.  Offering garage 
permits to low-wage workers was critical. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Council Member Cormack asked about the reason for building the garage. 
Mr. Shikada reported it was a discretionary decision by the Council. 
Mayor Fine advised that the purpose was to eliminate employee parking in 
the RPPs and to increase visitor and business parking. 
Council Member Cormack inquired whether residents of Evergreen Park filed 
any complaints about parking availability in 2019. 
Mr. Kamhi did not have that information.  Shortly after implementation of the 
Evergreen Park/Mayfield RPP, residents mentioned that parking problems had 
been remedied for the most part.  At that time, a parking occupancy study 
found parking impacts in the neighborhood, specifically in the zones nearest 
the commercial district.  Because of that, Staff recommended reducing the 
number of employee permits by half.  Staff hoped to conduct an occupancy 
study in the RPP zones when business returned to normal.   
Council Member Cormack noted the Council had not approved a policy for the 
garage. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified that Staff may need to revise practices. 
Council Member Cormack requested an estimate of the number of parking 
garage spaces available during a weekday lunch hour.   
Mayor Fine estimated 111 spaces. 
Council Member Filseth calculated 117 spaces available for retail customers. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired whether the 200 in-lieu parking spaces were 
designated for retail workers in ground-floor uses only. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified that they were designated for visitors to ground-floor 
uses.  Uses would pay into the in-lieu program, but spaces were not going to 
be reserved for specific uses. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested the number of spaces available for customers.   
Mr. Kamhi indicated 427 visitor spaces, assuming 60 percent of permit 
holders occupied their spaces.  However, a California Avenue Commercial 
District permit holder was allowed to park in any garage or lot.   
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired regarding assumptions about the impact of 
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) production on parking demand in the 
neighborhoods. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Mr. Kamhi did not have that information. 
Mr. Shikada answered none. 
Vice Mayor DuBois commented that the in-lieu program did not align with the 
desire to support community-serving businesses.   
Mr. Shikada clarified that the property owner was responsible for the in-lieu 
fee. 
Vice Mayor DuBois believed the recommendation did not solve the problem 
of ensuring parking was available for retail workers and customers.   
Mr. Shikada reported the macro rate applied to the use reflected the 
combination of workers and customers.   
Vice Mayor DuBois recalled that residents and merchants supported the 
garage.  The Council added floors to the garage to increase the amount of 
retail parking and provide parking for RPP employee permitholders.  Residents 
accepted employee parking in the neighborhoods based on the promise to 
reduce the number of employees parking in the neighborhoods when the 
garage was complete.  He suggested Staff move all RPP employee 
permitholders to the garage and in the spring sell them permits for the garage 
only.  He was more interested in garage parking for low-wage workers than 
the in-lieu program.  He requested the consequences of eliminating the in-lieu 
program. 
Mr. Shikada reported one consequence was elimination of the provision for 
intensification related to re-occupancy of retail spaces.  The parking in-lieu fee 
program and parking permit program for Downtown were independent of each 
other.   
Mr. Baird added that the in-lieu fee program was a macro planning-level 
exercise; whereas, the operation of parking programs was micro-scaled.   
Council Member Kniss inquired whether Staff communicated with the business 
community regarding their expectations.   
Mr. Kamhi stated businesses preferred to obtain RPP employee permits and 
allow visitors to park in the garage.  Residents preferred employees park in 
the garage. 
Council Member Kniss asked if the wayfinding guidance system was going to 
be installed in the garage. 
Mr. Kamhi answered yes.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Mr. Shikada added that Staff was able to dynamically allocate spaces between 
permit and public spaces by using the guidance system.  The guidance system 
was going to be valuable in addressing new work-from-home models. 
Council Member Kniss asked if the Staff recommendation was the best 
proposal. 
Mr. Kamhi reply yes.  He was comfortable that the recommendation was viable 
and measured. 
Mr. Baird added that Staff was developing a parking action plan to review 
suggestions provided over the summer.  The suggestions were going to help 
Staff address parking demand and supply.  Staff needed an opening day policy 
to transition from the past to the future.   
Mr. Shikada suggested reducing the number of in-lieu program parking spaces 
to 100 to provide flexibility while Staff determined what worked. 
Mayor Fine appreciated the ability to provide dynamic parking in the garage.  
Moving RPP employee permitholders to the garage was fair.  The question 
remained of whether all or some employee permitholders were removed from 
the RPP Districts.  An in-lieu program was acceptable as long as it was not 
used to cap development.  He inquired about the best method for maintaining 
reduced-cost permits for low-wage workers moving from the RPP to the 
garage. 
Mr. Kamhi explained that reduced-cost permits were offered for sale prior to 
any other permits. 
Mr. Shikada noted permit pricing was not before the Council. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified that reduced-price permits were offered for the RPP but 
not the garage.  Overall, Staff planned to reduce the number of employee 
permits allowed in RPP zones.   
Mayor Fine requested the number of RPP employee permits that were 
reduced-cost permits. 
Mr. Kamhi did not have that information due to a change in vendors.  
Anecdotally, the number was around 30 percent.  Staff wanted to determine 
that demand before moving all RPP employee permitholders to the garage. 
Council Member Kniss asked if the item would return to the Council in the 
future. 
Mayor Fine advised that Staff needed to return with an Ordinance. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Council Member Kou asked if new construction was eligible for the in-lieu fee 
program. 
Mr. Kamhi replied no. 
Council Member Kou inquired whether the in-lieu fee would survive the closure 
of a business. 
Mr. Kamhi answered no.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney, reported Staff needed to look more closely at the 
in-lieu program as it was fairly complicated. 
Council Member Kou wanted to ensure parking for low-wage workers was near 
businesses.  There were promises to move RPP employee permitholders to the 
garage.  More community engagement was needed.  She wanted to know why 
the permit system was different from that used in Downtown. 
Mr. Kamhi advised that it was a product of the way the California Avenue 
Business District was formed.   
Council Member Kou asked if the Ordinance was going to provide a separate 
permit system for each garage.   
Mr. Kamhi noted there were benefits to each garage having its own permit 
system.   
Council Member Kou expressed interest in implementing and enforcing 
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) programs.  She requested the 
meaning of targeted parking supply investment. 
Mr. Baird responded the parking garage. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Council had to decide the issue at the 
current time. 
Mr. Shikada indicated opening the garage without a plan to allocate spaces 
was a problem for the public. 
Council Member Tanaka did not know if the Staff’s recommendation was going 
to solve the neighborhood parking issue.  He inquired about the date for 
opening the garage. 
Mr. Shikada noted a date had not been scheduled, but within a month. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the process to modify the allocations. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Mr. Kamhi reported the Council had to approve modifications.  He hoped to 
establish criteria for managing parking inventory once Staff understood the 
dynamics. 
Council Member Tanaka believed an in-lieu program and an assessment 
district were logical.  More feedback and information and a model were 
needed.  Pricing mattered because it drove demand.   
Mr. Baird advised that Staff would need a year or more to develop a model.  
Staff wanted to transition to license plate recognition (LPR) enforcement in 
order to obtain data for parking management.   
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kniss to continue this item to a date uncertain. 
Council Member Kniss noted the Council was not receiving defined answers.  
She was not comfortable proceeding without more data. 
Council Member Filseth believed the garage parking supply was sufficient to 
move many of the RPP permitholders to the garage and increase the number 
of spaces available to customers.  The issue seemed to be the difference 
between permits and spaces.  Engaging the business community was critical.  
The in-lieu program was a distraction and confusing.  Increasing demand 
through intensification of uses was going to result in less supply.  The Finance 
Committee needed to review a reduced-price permit for garage parking.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the waitlist for garage parking was current. 
Mr. Kamhi was not confident in the numbers given the uncertainty around 
return to work. 
Vice Mayor DuBois calculated 186 parking place were available for the waitlist 
or the in-lieu program.  He believed the Staff recommendation accomplished 
the objectives.  He inquired about the use of in-lieu fees. 
Mr. Shikada advised that they were General Fund monies. 
Ms. Stump reported the structure of the program affected the options for those 
funds.   
Council Member Cormack wanted to review Council Member Filseth's model 
and supported continuing the item. 
Council Member Kou asked if Zone G was located on El Camino. 
Mr. Kamhi replied yes. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Council Member Filseth suggested Staff remove the actual estimate of 
demand. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Tanaka asked Staff to review Council Member Filseth's model. 
13. 
Update and Discussion on the Regional Housing Needs Allocation 
(RHNA) Process and Direction to Staff Regarding the City's Response to 
the Proposed RHNA Methodology, Including Preparation of a Formal 
Comment Letter. (THIS ITEM WILL BE CONTINUED TO NOVEMBER 
16, 2020)   
14. 
PUBLIC HEARING / QUASI-JUDICIAL / LEGISLATIVE. 788 San Antonio 
Road [19PLN-00079]: The City Council Will Consider: 1) Adoption of a 
Resolution Certifying a Final Environmental Impact Report (EIR), Making 
CEQA Findings Including a Statement of Overriding Considerations, and 
Adopting a Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Plan; 2) Adoption of a 
Resolution Amending the Comprehensive Plan; 3) Adoption of a Zoning 
Ordinance: a) Expanding the Housing Incentive Program to San Antonio 
Road, and b) Amending Definition of Gross Floor Area and Amending 
Retail Preservation for Housing; 4) Approval of a Tentative Map for a 
Condominium Subdivision; 5) Approval of a Variance to a Special 
Setback; and 6) Approval of Major Architectural Review for 102 Dwelling 
Units, a 1,800 Square Foot Commercial Space and two Basement Levels 
of Parking. (STAFF REQUESTS THIS ITEM BE CONTINUED TO 
NOVEMBER 16, 2020) 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Kniss reported the League of California Cities' annual dinner 
was scheduled for December 4, 2020. 
Council Member Tanaka advised that the City may not receive all of its 
anticipated Measure B funding. 
Council Member Cormack clarified that there was a proposal to allocate all 
current Measure B funding to the Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART).  Future 
Measure B funding may be divided among the cities.   
Mayor Fine expressed condolences to the family of the pedestrian who was 
killed the prior week. 
Council Member Kou asked Staff to investigate the intersection where the 
fatality occurred.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 28 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  11/09/2020 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, related that Staff was following up.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 12:38 A.M. 
