CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 5 
Regular Meeting 
January 6, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers at 6:10 P.M. 
Present:  
Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Special Orders of the Day 
1. 
Election of the 2020 Mayor. 
Mayor Filseth recognized dignitaries present in the audience and explained the 
procedure for election of Mayor and Vice Mayor. 
NOMINATION:  Council Member Tanaka nominated Vice Mayor Fine for 
Mayor for 2020. 
Council Member Tanaka advised that he had observed Vice Mayor Fine's 
leadership skills and ability to facilitate meetings when they served on the 
Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) and the Rail Committee.  Vice 
Mayor Fine offered a unique perspective in that he rented his home and was 
a Palo Alto native.  In addition, Vice Mayor Fine had a good grasp of 
technology.   
Vice Mayor Fine accepted the nomination and thanked Council Member Tanaka 
for his kind words. 
Council Member Kou felt each Council Member should have the opportunity to 
serve as Vice Mayor and Mayor.  While she supported Vice Mayor Fine in his 
service as Mayor, she expressed concern about some of the issues he had 
supported, Senate Bill (SB) 50 in particular. 
Council Member Kniss remarked that Vice Mayor Fine had been kind, polite, 
and thoughtful during his campaign for Council.  He was especially known for 
his critical thinking skills. 
Council Member Cormack indicated Vice Mayor Fine spoke his mind when 
warranted.  He was adept at incorporating the thoughts of others and ceding 
graciously.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 5 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  1/6/2020 
NOMINATION PASSED:  6-0-1 Kou abstain 
Mayor Fine thanked his Colleagues, his family, and the community for their 
support.  He promised to do his best on behalf of the City, the community, 
and the Council.  He appreciated Council Member Filseth's ability to knit the 
Council and the community together on difficult issues.  Housing, 
transportation and economic vitality was his focus areas in 2020.  Identifying 
a vision for the future of Palo Alto was going to be a challenge.  He was 
committed to finding a solution to grade separations in 2020 and encouraged 
everyone to engage with Connecting Palo Alto.  The community needed to 
make more of an effort to treat Stanford University and businesses as a part 
of the community.  He applauded the service of City employees.   
2. 
Election of the 2020 Vice Mayor. 
NOMINATION:  Council Member Kniss nominated Council Member Alison 
Cormack for Vice Mayor for 2020. 
NOMINATION:  Council Member Filseth nominated Council Member Tom 
DuBois for Vice Mayor for 2020. 
Council Member Kniss noted Council Member Cormack had received the most 
votes in the 2018 Council election, which indicated her value.  Council Member 
Cormack was good with numbers, observed details, and held regular office 
hours.   
Council Member Filseth related that Council Member DuBois was consistently 
thoughtful, a voice for reason and data, and known for looking at all sides of 
issues.  His experience serving on all Council Committees and chairing four of 
the Committees served him well as Vice Mayor.  Council Member DuBois was 
a mature and knowledgeable individual.  As Vice Mayor, he and Mayor Fine 
reflected the alignments and differences found in the Palo Alto community.   
Council Member Cormack hoped her Colleagues had observed her positive and 
professional approach to decisions.   
Council Member DuBois thanked Council Member Filseth for his kind words.  
He had learned a great deal in serving six years on the Council and promised 
to work with all Council Members.  Leadership that reflected the diversity of 
the community worked particularly well.   
Becky Sanders supported Council Member DuBois because of his Council 
experience and because he had shown tact, wisdom, and leadership.  Council 
Member DuBois was effective, understood the residential point of view, and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 5 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  1/6/2020 
balanced neighborhood concerns with other considerations.  He thought 
Council Member Cormack would be an amazing Vice Mayor in the near future. 
Elaine Meyer felt Council Member DuBois would serve the City and the Council 
well as Vice Mayor.  Council Member DuBois was civil, intelligent and 
experienced.   
Terry Holzemer remarked that Council Member Cormack and Council Member 
DuBois had served the City well; however, Council Member DuBois deserved 
the position of Vice Mayor.  Council Member DuBois had worked hard to find 
common ground and solutions when faced with challenging issues. 
Joe Hirsch believed Council Member DuBois would be a fine Vice Mayor.  The 
combination of Mayor Fine and Council Member DuBois as Vice Mayor reflected 
the entire community.  Council Member Cormack was going to make a fine 
Vice Mayor and Mayor in time.   
Suzanne Keehn indicated former Mayor Filseth and Vice Mayor Fine worked 
well together and represented Palo Alto residents well.  She hoped that would 
continue with Mayor Fine and Council Member DuBois. 
Council Member Kou commented that Council Member DuBois had 
represented the City fairly, considerately, and mindfully for six years.  With 
his experience on Council, Council Member DuBois deserved to be Vice Mayor.   
NOMINATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER CORMACK FAILED:  3-3-1 DuBois, 
Filseth, Kou no, Tanaka abstain 
NOMINATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER DUBOIS PASSED:  4-2-1 Fine, 
Kniss no, Tanaka abstain 
Vice Mayor DuBois advised that he would do his best to represent the City and 
work with his Colleagues. 
3. 
Resolution 9874 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Expressing Appreciation for 
Outstanding Public Service to Eric Filseth as 2019 Mayor.” 
Mayor Fine read the Resolution into the record.   
Lisa Chung, Senator Hill's Office thanked Council Member Filseth for his service 
as Mayor and wished him a restful 2020.   
Bob Moss remarked that Council Member Filseth had politely and effectively 
kept the Council on track. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 5 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  1/6/2020 
Winter Dellenbach expressed appreciation for Council Member Filseth raising 
awareness of businesses and taxes and fair share.   
Terry Holzemer thanked Council Member Filseth for his work and dedication 
in 2019.  Council Member Filseth's State of the City address was excellent and 
a tribute to his appreciation and knowledge of all communities in the West 
Bay. 
Karen Holman thanked Council Member Filseth for his service.  There was 
never any doubt that Council Member Filseth had prepared for each Council 
meeting.  The nominations of Vice Mayor DuBois and Council Member Cormack 
spoke well of their characters.  She thought Mayor Fine would conduct 
meetings graciously and with an even hand.   
Council Member Kou appreciated Council Member Filseth allowing the public 
to speak for not less than two minutes.  She also appreciated his patience, 
thoughtfulness and ability to conclude meetings before 11:00 P.M. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to adopt a 
Resolution expressing appreciation for outstanding public service to Eric 
Filseth as 2019 Mayor. 
Vice Mayor DuBois believed Council Member Filseth should be proud of his 
year as Mayor and hoped to hear his opinion more often in meetings.   
Mayor Fine commented that Council Member Filseth had handled meetings 
and the transition to seven Council Members graciously and fairly.  Council 
Member Filseth's sense of humor had enlivened meetings.   
Council Member Tanaka thanked Council Member Filseth for his service and 
good work as Mayor. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Filseth thanked everyone for their kind words and for the 
honor of serving as Mayor.  It had been a rare privilege.  He highlighted 
Council actions of which he was proud.   
Oral Communications 
Mark Shull hoped the City had objected to the Draft Environmental Impact 
Report (DEIR) for San Jose's Airport Project.  More flights from San Jose's 
airport increased airplane noise in Palo Alto.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 5 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  1/6/2020 
David Coale thanked the Council for supporting environmental and 
sustainability issues in 2019, especially the decision not to build the Downtown 
parking garage. 
Rebecca Ward shared portions of a letter from members of Congress to the 
Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and requested the 
Council release the vote that determined the Council would not pursue 
litigation against the FAA. 
Suzanne Keehn referred to a newspaper article that indicated Representative 
Speier would propose legislation about airplane noise.  Something had to be 
done about airplane noise. 
Joe Hirsch hoped all citizens' opinions and viewpoints would be voiced and 
debated in Council meetings through the collaboration of the Mayor and Vice 
Mayor.  He requested the Council conclude its negotiations with Palo Alto 
Unified School District (PAUSD) regarding Cubberley Community Center.  
Mayor Fine and Vice Mayor DuBois needed to allow 3 minutes for public 
comment when speakers numbered ten or less.   
Mayor Fine invited the public to the reception.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 7:19 P.M.  
