CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 22 
Regular Meeting 
November 2, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in Virtual 
Teleconference at 6:02 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None. 
Oral Communications 
Mary Sylvester believed the public did not have sufficient time to review 
documents for the Castilleja School expansion project.  She requested the 
Council investigate the intention of Castilleja School's attorney in making 
comments during Staff's presentation to the Planning and Transportation 
Commission (PTC) the prior week.   
Tyler Hoffman expressed disappointment with the proposal to rescind or 
reduce ground-floor retail protections in Palo Alto.  During economic 
downturns in 2000 and 2008, landlords were allowed to convert ground-floor 
retail and services to non-retail.  Landlords needed to accept lower rents for 
ground-floor spaces in exchange for owning prime commercial spaces.   
Rob Levitsky remarked that Mr. Lait's interpretation of the tree Ordinance was 
a stark reversal of the intention of the Ordinance.  If the Council allowed the 
interpretation to stand, the only protected trees in a single-family 
neighborhood were street trees.  Trees in the way of Castilleja School's 
expansion were going to be removed because the parcel was zoned R-1.   
Rebecca Eisenberg commented regarding the Council's time limit for public 
comments as a violation of the Brown Act. 
Reginald Williams summarized the inaccuracies contained in Vice Mayor 
DuBois' email about Council candidates. 
Aram James concurred with an October 28, 2020 article in The Daily Post 
regarding the Independent Police Auditor (IPA) and urged the Council to direct 
the IPA to review all misconduct allegations against Police Officers. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Carlin Otto asked the Council to allocate resources to count and enforce the 
daily maximum number of visitors to Foothills Park and to set the daily 
maximum at a sustainable number. 
Kelsey Banes supported Mr. Williams' comments.  In response to the 
complaint she filed against Vice Mayor DuBois for not filing Form 460, the Fair 
Political Practices Commission (FPPC) was investigating Vice Mayor DuBois.   
Minutes Approval 
1. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the October 19, 2020 City Council 
Meeting. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois 
to approve the Action Minutes for the October 19, 2020 City Council Meeting. 
Rebecca Eisenberg urged the Council not to approve the Minutes because the 
Agenda was created by individuals who were systematically violating the 
Brown Act. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss, third 
by Mayor Fine to pull Agenda Item Number 5 to be heard later in the meeting.  
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to 
continue Agenda Item Number 5 to a future meeting. 
Vice Mayor DuBois recalled that the prior week a majority of Council Members 
supported holding recruitments in the spring. 
Council Member Kou concurred with Vice Mayor DuBois' comment. 
Council Member Cormack advised that at least two of the Boards and 
Commissions had enough applications for a vote.   
Council Member Kou requested the names of the two Boards and 
Commissions. 
Council Member Cormack replied the Architectural Review Board (ARB) and 
the Parks and Recreation Commission (PRC). 
MOTION FAILED:  3-4 DuBois, Filseth, Kou yes 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Mayor Fine indicated Agenda Item 5 was moved to the end of the Agenda. 
Rebecca Eisenberg, addressing Agenda Item Numbers 2, 3, and 5, opposed 
the purchase of asphalt concrete as it was a major producer of carbon 
emissions.  The Police Department review process was fatally flawed.  She 
supported the proposal to allow the new Council to appoint Board and 
Commission members. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to approve 
Agenda Item Numbers 2-4. 
2. 
Approval of a Blanket Purchase Order With Graniterock in the Amount 
of $400,000 Annually for a Three-year Term for a Total Not-to-Exceed 
Amount of $1,200,000 for Asphalt Concrete Materials for Public Works 
and Utilities Departments. 
3. 
Accept the Staff Report on the Palo Alto Police Department (PAPD) 
Revised Policy 300 on Use of Force. 
4. 
Refer the Development of Permanent Public Art on King Plaza at City 
Hall to the Public Art Commission. 
5. 
Approve and Authorize the Extension of the Fall 2020 Board and 
Commission Recruitment for Positions on the Architectural Review 
Board, Planning Transportation Commission, Historic Resources Board, 
and Parks and Recreation Commission for an Additional six Weeks, With 
an Application Deadline of December 16, 2020. 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 2-4:  7-0 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported the Police Department was not aware of 
any credible threat or protest scheduled to occur in Palo Alto during the 
General Election.  Registered voters could return their ballots by mail or drop 
box or vote in person.  Revisions to Police Policy Manual Section 300, which 
the Council approved on the Consent Calendar, incorporated a significant body 
of work from the Human Relations Commission (HRC), Council Ad Hoc 
Committee, Palo Alto Police Department, Palo Alto Police Officers Association 
(PAPOA), and the Police Managers Association (PMA).  Free COVID-19 testing 
and flu shots were available on November 6 and 7, 2020 respectively.  Family 
Movie Night in the Park was scheduled for November 13, 2020.  A virtual Tree 
Lighting Ceremony was planned for November 20, 2020 with details of a 
Holiday Home Decorating Contest to follow.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois believed Agenda Item Number 3 needed to be an Action 
Item because of the extensive revisions.   
Council Member Kou agreed with Vice Mayor DuBois' comment and remarked 
that the Council responded to community concerns with substantial changes 
to the Use of Force Policy.  The City missed an opportunity to acknowledge 
the vast amount of work required to revise the policy. 
Council Member Kniss noted that COVID-19 testing was the only thing 
preventing Santa Clara County from returning to the red tier.  She encouraged 
the public to get tested.   
Council Member Filseth appreciated Staff revising the Police policy exactly as 
the Council and HRC requested. 
Mayor Fine appreciated the HRC's and community's work on the Police policy. 
Action Items 
6. 
Adoption of an Ordinance Amending the Municipal Code to Rename 
Foothills Park to Foothills Nature Preserve and Open it to the General 
Public by Removing Limits on Non-Residents, While Maintaining the 
Maximum Capacity of 1,000 Persons and Providing Residents First 
Access to Reservations for Towle Campground and Oak Grove Group 
Picnic Area. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported Staff was confident they were capable of 
managing Foothills Park in line with the community's interest in conserving 
natural resources.  The Parks and Recreation Commission (PRC) began the 
discussion in 2018 and in 2019 recommended the Council adopt a pilot 
program for Foothills Park.  In August 2020, the Council directed Staff to 
implement the pilot program in the fall of 2020 or the winter of 2021.  In 
September 2020, litigation was instigated to open Foothills Park to 
nonresidents.  The City Attorney's Office worked with the plaintiffs to develop 
the Staff recommendation as a way to avoid protracted litigation. 
Kristen O’Kane, Community Services Director, advised that the entrance gate 
to Foothills Park was staffed on weekends only; an entrance fee was not 
charged; and the number of visitors was limited to 1,000 at one time.  The 
number of visitors was not limited to 1,000 people per day, but to 1,000 
people at one time.  Some amenities were available for reservations.  The 
General Fund provided funding for the management and maintenance of 
Foothills Park.  Limitations and closures were in place due to COVID-19 and 
the risk of fire.  Dogs were allowed in Foothills Park on weekdays only and 
were required to be leashed.  The benefits of opening Foothills Park to 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
nonresidents included increased access to nature-rich experiences, increased 
well-being of youth and adults, opportunities for additional partnerships in 
environmental projects, and reduced impacts on neighboring open space 
preserves.   
Daren Anderson, Community Services Assistant Director, related that Staff 
needed to install a real-time vehicle counter, increase waste collection service, 
and improve parking delineation prior to opening Foothills Park.  On opening 
day and the following few weekends, the number of Staff needed to be 
increased.  Staff planned to assess the visitor experience and the park over 
several months to determine if additional resources were needed.  The 
Monitoring Plan called for Staff to monitor the number of park visitors, litter, 
trash and recycling containers, and parking in non-designated areas.  
Grassroots Ecology offered to monitor trails for invasive plant species and 
sensitive habitat species and provide anecdotal observations of impacts to 
animals or plants.  Options for the Council's consideration were continuing the 
1,000 visitor limit, reducing the limit to 750 visitors, directing Staff to return 
in the spring with an evaluation and recommendation for the number of 
visitors, charging no entrance fee, charging a fee on weekends only with Staff 
collecting the fee at the entrance gate, and charging a fee every day with 
visitors depositing fees in a collection box on weekdays. 
Alex Von Feldt, Grassroots Ecology, supported eliminating the residency 
requirement and the capacity limit because ecologically sensitive areas were 
not located in the high-use areas of the park.  Many of the volunteers who 
worked in Foothills Parks were not Palo Alto residents.   
Anne Cribbs, Parks and Recreation Commission Vice Chair, noted access to 
nature provided developmental and mental health benefits and increased 
environmental stewardship.  Working together, the City and the community 
would protect this special resource.   
Ms. O’Kane indicated if the Council approved the Staff recommendation, next 
steps included a second reading of the Ordinance on November 16, 2020, an 
effective date of December 17, 2020 for the Ordinance, preparation of an 
opening plan, and follow-up with the Council in the spring.  If the Council did 
not approve the Staff recommendation, Staff needed to present options for a 
pilot program. 
Mayor Fine chastised Council Member Kou for communicating purported 
confidential information, votes, and attendance from Council Closed Sessions.  
Code Section 2.04.040 prohibited the disclosure of any matter discussed 
during a Closed Session, and Council Procedures and Protocols prohibited the 
disclosure of confidential information without proper legal authorization. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Council Member Kou objected to Mayor Fine's accusation as she did not divulge 
any confidential information.  She conducted a survey of her own. 
James Hindery urged the Council to support opening Foothills Park to all neighbors. 
Jeff Greenfield, speaking for Keith Reckdahl, Fred Balin, Marilyn Keller, and 
Gerry Mastellar, supported opening Foothills Park if it was balanced with 
environmental stewardship, staffing, and infrastructure.  The lawsuit 
eliminated community involvement.  If the Council approved the Staff 
recommendation, it needed to support infrastructure updates, increased 
staffing, and enhanced environmental monitoring; set the daily visitor limit at 
500 to 750 people; require an entrance fee on weekends; prioritize residents' 
reservations for all amenities; and direct Staff to return with a comprehensive 
policy recommendation in the spring.   
Rohin Ghosh recommended the Council approve the Staff recommendation 
with no changes.  Environmental groups supported opening the park.  The 
idea of limiting visitors in order to preserve the park was absurd. 
Bill Ross felt more transparency and certainty was needed regarding the 
proposed settlement.  The proposed settlement was significant regardless of 
the Council's opinions of opening.  The Council needed an independent legal 
opinion regarding the settlement. 
Aram James supported opening the park and hoped the Council adopted the 
proposed Ordinance. 
Jennifer Michel shared her affinity with Foothills Park and asked the Council to 
open it to nonresidents so that she could visit it again. 
Ryan Globus supported allowing nonresidents into Foothills Park and a limit of 
1,000 visitors and opposed prioritizing residents' reservations and charging an 
entrance fee. 
Neva Yarkin opposed opening Foothills Park to the general public because 
more visitors meant more noise and trash. 
Salim Damerdji asked the Council to approve the Staff recommendation as 
written. 
Raven Malone stated the General Fund supported Foothills Park, and the 
primary source of the General Fund was the Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT).  
Tourists paid for the park; yet, tourists were not allowed to use it.  She 
supported opening Foothills Park to everyone and charging an entrance fee. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Reginald Williams supported opening the park.   
Scott O’Neil remarked that litigation was costly, and winning the lawsuit was 
not a message the Council wanted to send.   
Kelsey Banes did not support a pilot program and urged the Council to open 
the park.   
Rebecca Eisenberg shared a resident's story of being asked to prove her 
residency when visiting Foothills Park.   
Sonya Bradski favored charging an entrance fee for nonresidents because 
residents paid taxes to support the park, and many other cities charged 
entrance fees to nonresidents.   
Elliott Wright felt a protracted lawsuit would cost the City more than allowing 
nonresidents into the park.   
Madhumita Gupta concurred with comments in support of the Staff 
recommendation.  The limit on visitors to the park was a conservation 
measure.  The park and its inhabitants did not care if the 1,000 visitors were 
residents or nonresidents. 
Leland Levy trusted the Community Services Department to protect the 
integrity of the park.  Closing the park to nonresidents did not violate any 
laws, but the Council needed to do what was right. 
Joe Hirsch concurred with Ms. Yarkins' comments.  Council Member Kou's 
survey found a significant number of residents supported the residency 
requirement.  The requirement had a de minimis effect on nonresidents' 
Constitutional freedoms.  The public deserved to know if the lawsuit was the 
driving force to remove the requirement and to see the proposed settlement 
agreement. 
Council took a break at 8:00 P.M. and returned at 8:19 P.M. 
Council Member Kniss asked if alcohol was allowed in parks. 
Ms. O’Kane advised that alcohol was allowed in some City parks with a permit.  
Generally, alcohol consumption in parks was not allowed. 
Mr. Anderson clarified that visitors to Foothills Park were allowed to consume 
alcohol in the park.  Alcohol was prohibited in Johnson, Boulware, Scott, Greer 
skate park facility, Robles, Hopkins, El Palo Alto Park, Cogswell Plaza, and 
Lytton Plaza.  Without a permit, alcohol was prohibited in Rinconada, Mitchell, 
Heritage, and Eleanor Pardee parks.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Council Member Kniss suggested the Council consider not allowing alcohol 
without a permit at Foothills Park.  She requested the policy for fires in 
Foothills Park. 
Mr. Anderson indicated fires were allowed at Towle Camp with a permit but 
not on red flag days and other fire danger days.  With guidance from the Fire 
Department, Staff closed barbecues when fire danger was high. 
Council Member Kniss asked if fires had been a problem in Foothills Park. 
Mr. Anderson related that fire was a concern at the hillside barbecues.  Staff 
was considering a recommendation to remove the hillside barbecues. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested the number of parking spaces in Foothills Park. 
Mr. Anderson replied approximately 370. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested the Council consider a limit on vehicles rather 
than people.  He inquired regarding the consequences of the Council adopting 
the Staff recommendation without the injunction. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, suggested the litigation may not settle if the 
Council did not support the injunction.  She preferred to advise the Council on 
the legal risks and defenses for the City in a confidential forum. 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted Los Altos Hills installed no-parking signs along the 
road to Arastradero Preserve, which restricted public access to the park.  He 
inquired regarding the methodology of studying the impact of dogs with 
increased usage of the park. 
Mr. Anderson reported Rangers typically tracked their contacts with off-leash 
dogs.  The Rangers could formally track those contacts in more detail.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the City Attorney clarified the name of the lawsuit 
prior to the Council adjourning to Closed Session. 
Ms. Stump recalled clarifying that the lawsuit was filed because the Agenda 
identified prospective litigation.  She needed to check on whether she 
indicated the suit was removed to federal court.   
Vice Mayor DuBois noted the October 19, 2020 Minutes, which the Council 
approved earlier in the meeting, did not reflect oral changes to the Agenda 
Item. 
Ms. Stump agreed to review the Minutes to ensure their accuracy. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Council Member Cormack asked if visitation to Foothills Park was high during 
winter months. 
Mr. Anderson responded no. 
Council Member Cormack asked if nearby or mid-peninsula parks limited 
occupancy. 
Mr. Anderson was not familiar with any parks having occupancy limits. 
Mayor Fine inquired regarding the City's ability to charge an entrance fee, the 
easiest fee structure or type to administer, and a reasonable amount to 
charge. 
Ms. O’Kane reported the Municipal Code did not set a fee for use of Foothills 
Park.  If the Council wished to impose a fee, Staff needed to return with an 
amendment to the Code and a recommendation for a fee amount.  Staff 
believed charging a minimal amount per car, perhaps $5.00, and providing an 
annual membership with a reduced rate for residents was appropriate.   
Mayor Fine requested the Foothills Park amenities for which Staff accepted 
reservations and which of the reservations could include a preference for 
residents. 
Ms. O’Kane related that Staff accepted reservations for Towle campground, 
the Oak Grove picnic area, and a classroom in the Interpretive Center. 
Mayor Fine asked if the proposal included the classroom. 
Ms. O’Kane replied no. 
Mayor Fine requested usage of the three amenities. 
Ms. O'Kane stated the campground and picnic area were quite popular and 
were often booked up.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if it was possible to charge a parking fee rather 
than an entrance fee. 
Mr. Anderson supported charging a fee for vehicles only and recommended 
staffing the entry gate in order to welcome visitors, explain the rules, and 
accept credit card payments.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the cost of infrastructure projects planned 
for Foothills Park and the increased costs associated with increased usage of 
Foothills Park.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Mr. Anderson reported the costs of replacing restrooms, the Sunfish Island 
bridge, and the canoe dock were $1.5 million, $200,000, and $125,000 
respectively.  The cost of Buckeye Creek improvements was $3.9 million.   
Council Member Tanaka expressed interest in determining a fee amount to 
fund those projects and increased maintenance costs if usage increased. 
Mr. Shikada advised that deferred maintenance costs were greater than a 
vehicle fee could fund.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the total cost of deferred and routine 
maintenance and possible funding sources. 
Council Member Kou requested an explanation of using a vehicle counter to 
count visitors. 
Mr. Anderson explained that Staff utilized a multiplier to estimate the number 
of visitors.  Staff multiplied the number of cars by 2.7 to estimate the number 
of weekend visitors. 
Council Member Kou inquired about the consequences of the number of 
visitors exceeding the limit. 
Mr. Anderson indicated Rangers stopped visitors from entering the park until 
a sufficient number of visitors left the park. 
Council Member Kou asked if concerts were allowed in Foothills Park. 
Mr. Anderson replied yes with a special permit.  A permit application for a 
concert was subject to several levels of review. 
Council Member Kou believed the concern about concerts was increased noise 
levels in a nature preserve.  She inquired about the City's liability for 
nonresident rental of canoes. 
Mr. Anderson advised that all visitors signed a waiver. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding the funding source for maintaining 
and replacing canoes. 
Mr. Anderson answered the Community Services Department's operating 
budget. 
Council Member Kou asked if Staff had considered increased traffic on Page 
Mill Road from more visitors traveling to the park. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Mr. Anderson reported Staff planned to install permanent no-parking signs in 
a few areas along Page Mill Road.   
Council Member Kou asked if Staff planned to fill the vacant Ranger Manager 
position. 
Mr. Anderson explained that the competition for limited funding may not allow 
Staff to fill the position.   
Council Member Kou inquired about mountain bikers using the back entrance 
to bike on the trails. 
Mr. Anderson explained that bicyclists were allowed to travel on the road 
through the park.  Which entrance mountain bikers were using to access the 
trails was unknown. 
Council Member Kniss asked if more people hiked or used the campground 
and picnic area. 
Mr. Anderson indicated the picnic area received the most use. 
Council Member Kniss asked if a picnic table was usually available at lunch 
time for visitors without a reservation. 
Mr. Anderson stated a picnic area was usually available without a reservation 
on weekdays.  The availability of a picnic area without a reservation on 
weekends depended on the time of year.  Staff reviewed 2020 visitor 
information and found the number of park visitors reached 750 at one time 
on about six occasions, most of which were holidays. 
Vice Mayo DuBois agreed with opening the park to all.  The Council needed to 
consider starting with a lower vehicle count and raising the count after a few 
weeks.  He supported charging a fee on weekends and different fees for 
residents and nonresidents.  He requested discussion of the permanent 
injunction. 
Mayor Fine requested an explanation of the injunction. 
Ms. Stump advised that the injunction was important to the plaintiffs.  She 
suggested the plaintiffs viewed the injunction as providing a solid and final 
resolution of the legal issues.  If the City did not agree to the injunction, the 
plaintiffs' decision to settle or litigate the issues was unknown. 
Mayor Fine interpreted the comments as litigation was likely to proceed if the 
Council did not approve the injunction.  He questioned the rationale for 
opposing the injunction.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Council Member Kou requested the remedies for residents if the City settled 
the lawsuit and residents disagreed with the Council's actions. 
Ms. Stump reported not adopting the proposed Ordinance was within the 
Council's discretion.  If the Council did not adopt the Ordinance, Staff planned 
to return to the Council later in November with details of various models for a 
pilot program.  When a settlement was complete, the Council and the plaintiffs 
were required to approve it.  The framework for settlement included 
recognition of voters' ability to referend a Council Ordinance.  If a referendum 
was qualified for the ballot prior to the end of the 30-day period following a 
second reading of the Ordinance, the settlement would be void, and litigation 
would proceed. 
Council Member Kou inquired about an initiative. 
Ms. Stump explained that the right of initiative was very broad, and an 
initiative would be handled separately from the litigation.  Ultimately, an 
initiative may be decided by a judge. 
Council Member Kou inquired about outside counsel not disclosing the fact 
that the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) 
was or had been their client. 
Ms. Stump did not believe there was a problem with the work conducted on 
behalf of the City.  If the Council wished to pursue the topic, Staff needed to 
schedule a discussion. 
Council Member Kou expressed reservations regarding outside counsel having 
a potential conflict of interest. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the annualized cost of infrastructure and 
staffing. 
Mr. Anderson indicated he needed additional time to provide the cost. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if there was a draft settlement agreement. 
Ms. Stump answered no.  When a settlement agreement was final, Staff 
planned to make it available to the public.  Hopefully, the settlement 
agreement was complete prior to a second reading of the Ordinance. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Council needed to obtain a second opinion 
regarding the litigation. 
Ms. Stump explained that the Council's timeframe for resolving the litigation 
was limited.  The settlement offer included the plaintiffs' agreement not to 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
seek reimbursement of legal fees if the situation was resolved by the end of 
the year.  She believed there was not a conflict of interest, and outside 
counsel's advice was thorough and solid. 
Council Member Tanaka clarified that he did not thoroughly read the 
memorandum regarding the potential conflict of interest.  Members of the 
public may not have seen it. 
Ms. Stump stated the memorandum was not provided to the public. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the difference between a referendum and 
an initiative. 
Ms. Stump explained that the State Constitution provided citizens with the 
right to impact government through an initiative, recall, and referendum.  A 
referendum reversed an Ordinance adopted by a local government.  Citizens 
had 30 days to gather a sufficient number of signatures to initiate a 
referendum.  The time and topic of an initiative was not limited.  A recall 
pertained to removing an elected official from office. 
Council Member Tanaka understood that a referendum overturned an 
Ordinance and placed it on the ballot.   
Ms. Stump clarified that the Ordinance was suspended rather than overturned.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if an Ordinance remained in effect pending the 
outcome of the vote on an initiative. 
Ms. Stump replied yes. 
Council Member Tanaka requested the number of signatures needed for an 
initiative. 
Ms. Stump needed to review the City Charter to provide that information. 
Council Member Kniss noted the Council received information about the 
lawsuit. 
Ms. Stump advised that the Council did not vote to disclose information 
provided in Closed Session. 
Vice Mayor DuBois opposed the injunction because it may be perceived as 
forcing the City to open Foothills Park to nonresidents rather than the City 
choosing to open Foothills Park.  The City did not need an injunction to manage 
its assets. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Council Member Kou inquired about details of the permanent injunction. 
Ms. Stump reiterated that it was a component of settlement, which was not 
complete. 
Council Member Kou expressed concern that the time for Council review of the 
settlement would be limited.   
Ms. Stump remarked that a permanent injunction was intended to create 
finality around the decision to open the park, if the Council wished to do so. 
Mr. Shikada read the Staff Report language pertaining to the permanent 
injunction.  He expected future documents to conform to that description. 
Council Member Kou commented that the permanent injunction prevented 
current and future residents and Councils from repairing environmental 
damage caused by increased usage of the park.   
Mr. Shikada clarified that the injunction pertained to resident versus 
nonresident access only.  The City retained the ability to manage and address 
costs under the injunction. 
Council Member Kou stated the City was giving up rights with respect to 
residents bearing a large portion of repair costs.  The Council previously 
approved opening the park in a measured way so that the issue was not social 
justice versus the environment.  She wanted to try the case in federal court 
because federal judges were appointed and a federal court was the 
appropriate court to determine whether the City violated the Constitution. 
Mayor Fine commented that the Council had an option to open the park in 
June 2020 but continued the item to August.  In August, the Council declined 
to eliminate the residency requirement.  Concerns about increased usage 
impacting the park pertained to the number of visitors, not the visitors 
themselves.  Under the settlement, the City retained the ability to manage the 
park and implement sustainability measures, including capacity limits, fees, 
and reservations.  The City was not allowed to discriminate based on 
residency.   
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to adopt an 
Ordinance to: 
A. 
Open Foothills Park to the general public by removing limits on 
nonresidents, while maintaining the maximum capacity of 1,000 persons 
and providing residents first access to reservations for all facilities;  
B. 
Amend or delete outdated and duplicative code language;  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
C. 
For the first 90 days, temporarily limit the capacity to 750 people at any 
one time; and 
D. 
Return to City Council and the Parks and Recreation Commission with 
proposals for fee, capacity, and park management/environmental 
integrity studies. 
Mayor Fine believed concerns about the number of people visiting in the first 
months after opening were legitimate.  Part C provided Staff with time to study 
the impacts of increased usage.  Part D ensured the park remained an 
awesome resource for visitors.  He did not support changing the name to 
Foothills Nature Preserve.  The lawsuit addressed foundational civil issues of 
the residency requirement.   
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested Council Members supported a pilot program in 
August 2020 because they thought there was time for it with the public health 
orders in place at that time.   
AMENDMENT:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou 
to direct Staff to use the renaming process to consider renaming Foothills Park 
to Foothills Nature Preserve.  
Council Member Kou felt changing the name was appropriate because Foothills 
Park was a preserve. 
Council Member Kniss supported changing the name because nature preserve 
was more precise than park.   
Council Member Cormack suggested the Council refer a name change to the 
PRC to allow public input and to follow the City's naming process. 
Vice Mayor DuBois preferred to direct Staff to follow the naming process. 
Mr. Shikada reported the naming policy included a referral to the Board, 
Commission, or Committee of jurisdiction.  In this case, the Commission of 
jurisdiction was the PRC. 
AMENDMENT PASSED:  7-0 
AMENDMENT:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou 
to direct Staff to not agree to a permanent injunction. 
Council Member Kou noted in August 2020 the Council approved opening the 
park to nonresidents through the pilot program.  A permanent injunction was 
unnecessary. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Council Member Cormack believed a permanent injunction was a part of 
democracy and the check-and-balance system.  She did not support the 
Amendment. 
Mayor Fine concurred with Council Member Cormack.  If the Council approved 
the Motion as the right thing to do, then the injunction did not matter.  Leaving 
the possibility of rescinding the Ordinance open was not steadfast.  He inquired 
about the effect of not agreeing to the injunction on the process.   
Ms. Stump expressed a high degree of confidence that Council approval of all 
the terms listed in the Staff recommendation would resolve the litigation at 
little cost to the City.  The Amendment created substantial uncertainty as to 
whether resolution of the litigation occurred. 
Mayor Fine commented that the settlement was the only option that avoided 
attorney fees.  The Amendment introduced substantial risk to the settlement, 
finances, and a good outcome. 
AMENDMENT FAILED:  3-4 DuBois, Kou, Tanaka yes  
Council Member Cormack advised that since the topic was first raised two 
years ago, many people had changed their minds about opening Foothills Park.  
The summary of the PRC's panel discussion indicated Foothills Park could be 
shared responsibly.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the information he sought earlier in the 
discussion. 
Ms. Stump advised that the number of signatures needed for an initiative and 
a referendum was the same.   
Mr. Anderson reported the identified capital costs spread over the next five 
years was approximately $2,120,000 or $424,000 annually.  He agreed to 
provide staff costs at a later time. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the injunction prohibited future Council 
actions. 
Ms. Stump answered yes, if the court entered the injunction. 
AMENDMENT:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kou to defer parts A, B and C to give the City Attorney time to get a second 
opinion. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked that various members of the public wanted 
a second opinion.  The national election deflected interest from this topic.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
There were questions about prioritizing residents for some things.  The 
community needed time to consider the settlement. 
Council Member Kou felt there continued to be questions about a conflict of 
interest for outside counsel.  She wanted to understand the risk of proceeding 
in federal court.   
Vice Mayor DuBois felt the injunction was negotiable, assuming the Council 
agreed to all the other conditions.  The timing was not negotiable.   
AMENDMENT FAILED:  2-5 Kou, Tanaka yes  
Council Member Kniss recalled efforts to open Foothills Park in 1990.  While 
the heart wanted to share Foothills Park, the head listened to the community's 
desires.  The time was right to share Foothills Park.   
Council Member Filseth did not believe the community supported the 
contentions of racist, segregationist, or human rights issues.  The community 
needed to read Palo Alto's history of racism contained in the lawsuit.  The 
Council had to consider the totality of community desires, legal risks, and 
costs.   
Council Member Kou reported her survey found 66 percent of residents wanted 
to retain the residency requirement and wanted the City to defend the lawsuit.  
The lawsuit was an attempt to bully the City and frivolous.   
Council Member Tanaka requested the Mayor split the Motion into Parts A, B 
and C and Parts D and E. 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED: Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Vice 
Mayor DuBois to adopt an Ordinance to: 
A. 
Open Foothills Park to the general public by removing limits on 
nonresidents, while maintaining the maximum capacity of 1,000 persons 
and providing residents first access to reservations for all facilities;  
B. 
Amend or delete outdated and duplicative code language;  
C. 
For the first 90 days, temporarily limit the capacity to 750 people at any 
one time;  
D. 
Return to City Council and the Parks and Recreation Commission with 
proposals for fee, capacity, and park management/environmental 
integrity studies; and 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
E. 
Direct Staff to use the renaming process to consider renaming Foothills 
Park to Foothills Nature Preserve. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING  
MOTION AS AMENDED PARTS A, B, and C PASSED:  5-2 Kou, Tanaka no 
MOTION AS AMENDED PARTS D and E PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Kou asked the Mayor to publish his accusation and proof 
against her. 
Mayor Fine agreed to do so.   
Council took at break at 10:11 P.M. and returned at 10:21 P.M. 
7. 
Approval of a Surveillance Policy for the use of Construction Cameras at 
the 
California 
Avenue 
Parking 
Garage 
and 
Highway 
101 
Pedestrian/Bicycle Overpass Construction Projects, and of a Surveillance 
Policy for the use of a Parking Guidance System, in Accordance With the 
Surveillance and Privacy Protection Ordinance (Continued From 
September 21, 2020). 
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director, reported the Council adopted a 
Surveillance and Privacy Protection Ordinance in September 2018.  The 
policies in this item were the first ones presented to the Council since then.  
Staff strengthened the policies after the Council continued the item on 
September 21, 2020. 
Holly Boyd, Public Works Assistant Director, advised that detailed information 
regarding surveillance and technology evaluations and policies was contained 
in the Staff Report.  The Surveillance Use Policy for Construction Cameras 
applied to cameras used to monitor construction progress and to share 
progress with Staff and residents.  Protections included capturing still images 
only once every 15 minutes, providing only a current view and a time-lapse 
video to the public, and managing and retaining data on webpages and City 
servers.  The Surveillance Use Policy for Parking Guidance System was 
intended to improve parking management strategies and operational 
efficiencies.  Protections included tracking parking availability only, requiring 
the vendor to complete a Vendor Information Security Assessment (VISA) 
process, and limiting staff and contractor access to data via a login/password 
protected system.  Staff planned to discuss future capabilities, including 
license plate recognition, with the Council in the future.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Rebecca Eisenberg expressed concern about the Police Department having 
access to images and questioned the purpose of the cameras. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the public had access to the information. 
Mr. Eggleston answered no, because the Council had not approved the 
policies. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff intended to post still photos or time-
lapse video of construction progress for public consumption. 
Mr. Eggleston responded both. 
Vice Mayor DuBois believed the risks from not having good surveillance 
policies were large.  He wanted to see additional information regarding the 
data captured, the format of data, encryption of data, capturing personally 
identifiable information, and the ability to delete data.  The City needed a 
policy for retention of surveillance data.  Access to data needed to be limited 
to specific positions within the City.  He inquired about federal or state laws. 
Mr. Eggleston advised that Staff did not find any laws that applied to these 
types of technologies. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to: 
A. 
Approve the surveillance policy and use of the construction video 
cameras for the California Avenue Parking Garage and Highway 101 
Pedestrian/Bicycle Overpass construction projects, which will be used to 
share progress on the construction with staff and residents and create 
a time-lapse video at the end of each project; and  
B. 
Approve the surveillance policy and use of a Parking Guidance System 
(PGS) for the California Avenue Parking Garage and future installations 
at other City-owned parking garages and lots. 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted surveillance data for the construction projects was 
to be deleted at the completion of projects.  He inquired whether personally 
identifiable information was to be collected with the parking guidance system. 
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, responded no. 
Monique LeConge Ziesenhenne, Assistant City Manager, advised that Staff 
continued to review and refine policies for surveillance and data capture. 
Council Member Kniss remarked that it was time to do this.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Council Member Tanaka inquired regarding the rationale for installing cameras 
at the almost-complete California Avenue parking garage. 
Mr. Eggleston related that the camera was installed at the beginning of the 
project.  Over time, Staff learned of the potential for the camera to capture 
sensitive information and began developing the first policies for surveillance.  
If the Council approved the policy, Staff planned to publish real-time images 
and time-lapse video.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Council was approving funding for the 
camera. 
Mr. Eggleston answered no.  Council approved funding for the parking garage 
camera with approval of the construction contract, and the Bike Bridge camera 
was approved through a change order. 
Council Member Tanaka noted construction cameras were typically used to 
promote projects or to monitor projects in outlying areas.  He felt the cameras 
were frivolous. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
8. 
(Former Agenda Item Number 5) Approve and Authorize the Extension 
of the Fall 2020 Board and Commission Recruitment for Positions on the 
Architectural Review Board, Planning Transportation Commission, 
Historic Resources Board, and Parks and Recreation Commission for an 
Additional six Weeks, With an Application Deadline of December 16, 
2020. 
Beth Minor, City Clerk, reported the item was presented because of a lack of 
applications. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to: 
A. 
Extend the Fall 2020 recruitment for positions on the Planning and 
Transportation Commission and Historic Resources Board; and  
B. 
Accept the Architectural Review Board and Parks and Recreation 
Commission applications; and  
C. 
Proceed with interviews for positions on all four Boards/Commissions 
with the intent of completing all interviews by December 7, 2020 and 
voting on the appointments on December 14, 2020.  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Council Member Cormack suggested including a date to end recruitments for 
the Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) and the Historic Resources 
Board (HRB). 
Ms. Minor proposed extending the recruitments to November 12, 2020. 
Council Member Kniss noted the number of appointments facing the new 
Mayor in January.  If the Council did not address this item before the end of 
the year, some Boards, Commissions, and Committees (BCCs) may be short 
of members in early 2021. 
Jeff Greenfield supported the new Council appointing members to BCCs given 
the Council discussion the prior week of moving recruitments to the spring.  
Extending the recruitments was logical in order to increase the number of 
applications.   
Rebecca Eisenberg concurred with Mr. Greenfield's comments.  Extending the 
recruitments for all four BCCs was in the public's interest. 
James Hindery preferred the incoming Council appoint members to these 
BCCs. 
Curtis Smolar agreed with prior public comments. 
Council Member Cormack believed the Council needed to accomplish the tasks 
before it.  Allowing new Council Members to become familiar with Council 
processes before having to appoint members to BCCs was a good idea. 
Vice Mayor DuBois remarked that the prior week a majority of Council 
Members agreed that avoiding lame duck appointments was logical.  The 
Council did not make its 2020 spring appointments until September 14, 2020.  
Setting a deadline was bad governance.  He wanted to extend the recruitment 
for the ARB.   
Council Member Filseth concurred with Vice Mayor DuBois.  Currently, there 
were not sufficient applications for the number of open positions.   
Mayor Fine advised that until the Council changed the rules, he intended to 
follow them.   
MOTION PASSED:  4-3 DuBois, Filseth, Kou no  
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 22 
City Council Meeting 
Final  Minutes: 11/02/2020 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Kou reported she was receiving public comment regarding 
vehicles speeding and not stopping at stop signs.  She requested the City 
Manager explore Police patrols of neighborhood streets. 
Council Member Filseth hoped to review documentation of Mayor Fine's 
accusation against Council Member Kou in order to resolve the issue soon. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:03 P.M. 
