CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 15 
Special Meeting 
October 26, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in Virtual 
Teleconference at 6:03 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
Study Session 
1. 
Update and Discussion on the City of Palo Alto's Race and Equity Work 
Including Discussion of a Mission Statement, Reorganization of 
Committee Structure, and Other Items. 
Chantal Cotton-Gaines, Deputy City Manager, reviewed the Mission 
Statement, framework, and practice areas for race and equity.  The Ad Hoc 
Committees were finished gathering data and were identifying gaps.   
Steve Guagliardo, Principal Management Analyst, reported the Alternative 
Models Ad Hoc Committee found that the City was unique in its provision of 
medical transport service and that combining the roles of the Police and Fire 
Departments was less advantageous.  The Ad Hoc Committee also explored 
Psychiatric Emergency Response Teams (PERT) and Mobile Crisis Response 
Teams (MCRT).  Staff was pursuing participation in the County of Santa Clara's 
(County) PERT Program.  The Ad Hoc Committee's findings aligned with the 
policing practice area for officer deployment priorities and practices for 
nonviolent calls, and the Ad Hoc Committee recommended work on alternative 
models continue via the practice area.   
Ms. Cotton-Gaines recalled potential areas of concern and options for the 
Council to consider in Policing Practice Areas 1 and 2.   
Andrew Binder, Assistant Police Chief, reviewed potential areas of concern and 
options for the Council to consider in Policing Practice Area 3, officer conduct 
investigations and transparency, and Policing Practice Area 4, discipline and 
accountability.  Staff revised Policy 300 to comply with the Council's 
August 24, 2020 directives, the Human Relations Commission's (HRC) 
recommendations, and the latest legal updates from Lexipol.  Policy 300 
prohibited any technique deliberately applied for the purpose of restricting 
blood or air flow to the head or neck, included nine de-escalation alternatives, 
required officers to use other reasonably available resources and techniques 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
when safe and feasible in deadly force applications, and included a force-
options chart and the policy for pointing and discharging a weapon.   
Ms. Cotton-Gaines noted on November 16, 2020, Staff planned to seek 
direction regarding the draft Mission Statement, action regarding new policies 
or policy changes related to gaps within the policing practice areas, and 
assignment of Ad Hoc Committee work beyond 2020.  Next steps were 
adoption of the draft Mission Statement, engagement on demographic data 
collection and reporting, pursuit of participation in the County's PERT Program, 
development of a policy regarding the timing and circumstances for records 
release, expansion of the Independent Police Auditor's (IPA) duties, 
preparation of an annual report on Revised Use of Force Investigations, 
incorporation of police reform into legislative priorities for 2021, and 
submission of work to the Policy and Services Committee. 
Winter Dellenbach requested revision of the Mission Statement as it was 
ambiguous and weak.  The language needed to include the words "commit to 
ending systemic racism."  The Use of Force Policy needed to be an Action Item.  
She inquired regarding the schedule and scope of work for a mental health 
worker.   
Rebecca Eisenberg concurred with Ms. Dellenbach's comments.  The Police 
Department had a history of violence against people of color.  Funding needed 
to be reallocated from the Police Department to real needs, especially mental 
health services.  The Council continued to engage in practices that supported 
inequality.   
Aram James asked the Council to form a reparations committee to address 
police violence and housing discrimination.  The City needed to collaborate 
with the District Attorney's Office to create an independent and robust police 
crimes unit. 
Mayor Fine suggested the Council focus on the Mission Statement, the practice 
areas, and directions for the November 2020 discussion of race and equality. 
Council Member Cormack wanted the Council to spend more time on policy 
direction for prioritization of enforcement activities, which was not included in 
next steps.  The Council needed more information regarding mental health 
calls, social issues, welfare checks, and nuisance calls in order to identify the 
correct organization to handle these issues.  She inquired regarding the role 
and scope of work of a Community Service Officer (CSO). 
Mr. Binder advised that CSOs were non-sworn officers who handled low-level 
activity that did not result in confrontations.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
Council Member Cormack inquired regarding the workload for CSOs. 
Mr. Binder indicated the two CSOs were consistently busy.  Some days were 
busier than others. 
Council Member Cormack supported the practice area items listed for Council 
consideration.  She preferred the Council continue work on race and equity.   
Council Member Kniss agreed that the Council needed to work on race and 
equity.  She referred to Ron Davis' comments regarding groups working 
together, the difficulties facing children of color, and evaluating police officers.  
The Council likely wanted to think extensively about policing because public 
safety was the core City service.   
Vice Mayor DuBois related additional issues identified by the Policy and Data 
Ad Hoc Committee and the Transparency Ad Hoc Committee and mapped to 
police practice areas.  The two Ad Hoc Committees wanted to present 
information about the additional issues to the Council in November 2020.  The 
proposal to update police policies annually was too slow.  They needed to be 
released to the public as they were updated.   
Council Member Filseth provided the Transparency Ad Hoc Committee's 
thoughts regarding the Police Chief's discretion to refer incidents to the IPA, 
the Alvarez case, and the timing and issuance of reports.   
Mayor Fine requested comments regarding the Mission Statement.  He asked 
about reasons for not expanding CSO duties. 
Mr. Binder reported the Police Department was working through the process 
to hire more CSOs.  The Police Department had a training program for CSOs. 
Mayor Fine believed working through the labor groups was quite complex.  The 
Council needed to focus on priorities for deploying officers.  He inquired about 
an expanded role for the District Attorney and the City's ability to affect an 
expansion of the District Attorney's role. 
Mr. Binder advised that the District Attorney proposed amending the officer-
involved protocols to create a special unit within the District Attorney's Office 
that would investigate any force incident that resulted in serious bodily injury.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager, added that the District Attorney collaborated with 
police departments within the county to craft the proposal.   
Mayor Fine felt this work may warrant a citizens' commission to instill public 
participation and confidence in the project. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
Council Member Kou inquired whether the citizens' commission and the Police 
Chief's Citizens Advisory Committee were similar. 
Mayor Fine indicated the two were similar but separate.   
Council Member Kou requested details and pros and cons for the PERT 
Program. 
Mr. Binder related that disadvantages were limited funding, staffing, and 
openings for the program.  The advantage of the PERT Program was pairing a 
clinician with a police officer to assist with mental health issues.  A schedule 
for the clinician had not been determined.   
Council Member Kou asked if one clinician would be provided to the City. 
Mr. Binder replied yes.  Most calls involving mental health issues occurred 
during the day and evening hours.  Therefore, Staff would work with the 
County to schedule the clinician during those times.  The County determined 
the number of clinicians assigned to Palo Alto and their hours. 
Council Member Kou requested additional information regarding the Crisis 
Assistance Helping Out On The Streets (CAHOOTS) Program and similar 
programs.  She inquired regarding Staff's participation in clinician interviews. 
Mr. Binder reported the County did not hire a sufficient number of clinicians in 
the first round of interviews to assign one to the City.  Staff hoped a second 
round of interviews resulted in the County assigning a clinician to the City by 
the end of the year.   
Mr. Shikada indicated a detailed report on the CAHOOTS Program involved a 
significant amount of Staff work.  The CAHOOTS Program was a new service 
and provided a level of service the City did not offer currently.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the PERT Program covered drug and homeless 
issues. 
Mr. Binder understood the program focused on mental health crises and 
issues.  Mental health issues often overlapped drug and homeless issues.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if a clinician alone responded to calls in the CAHOOTS 
Program. 
Mr. Binder answered yes.  In the PERT Program, an officer and clinician 
patrolled together and responded to calls with a mental health component. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois expressed interest in obtaining more information about the 
CAHOOTS Program or a similar program.  The language of the Mission 
Statement was dated.   
Mayor Fine supported developing a policy for the timing and release of 
evidence and documentation and expanding the IPA's role to include all use-
of-force incidents.  A survey may or may not provide useful information. 
Council Member Cormack also supported developing a policy for the timing 
and release of evidence and documentation and expanding the IPA's role to 
include all use-of-force incidents.  There was an opportunity to survey the City 
workforce as well as the Police Department regarding diversity and inclusion.  
She asked about the evaluation of police officers. 
Mr. Binder explained that an officer's immediate supervisor conducted an 
annual performance evaluation.  The Police Chief reviewed and signed off on 
the evaluations. 
Robert Jonsen, Police Chief, reported the Police Department did not assign 
quotas for arrests or citations.  Police officers were evaluated on how they 
applied expectations. 
Council Member Cormack requested the expectations. 
Mr. Jonsen advised that the community expected the Police Department to 
enforce traffic regulations.  Therefore, the Police Department highly 
recommended officers adopt schools and enforce traffic regulations during 
school hours.  The number of times an officer was enforcing traffic regulations 
or engaging the community at a school was part of the evaluation.   
Council Member Tanaka encouraged the Council to utilize the HRC as much as 
possible.   
Council Member Kniss believed expectations for officers could be more 
concrete.  She requested the ethnic makeup of the Palo Alto Police 
Department. 
Mr. Jonsen remarked that the Department's makeup reflected the 
community's ethnic makeup, but he needed to provide a specific breakdown 
at a later time. 
Council Member Kniss requested additional information regarding evaluation 
and expectations. 
Council Member Kou asked if the County administered the MCRT Program. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
Mr. Binder responded yes.  The MCRT Program was staffed with behavioral 
health clinicians rather than law enforcement.  The public contacted the 
program directly for assistance.  Clinicians requested police assistance as 
needed.   
Council Member Kou inquired about the City creating its own MCRT Program. 
Mr. Shikada advised that funding a new department was a problem.  The 
County was having difficulty staffing the program for 24/7 service.   
Council Member Kou wanted to separate grievances and disciplinary matters 
from salary and benefits during labor negotiations.  She supported expanding 
the IPA's scope of work.  She proposed the Mission Statement incorporate 
language for healing and maintaining dignity.  She requested Staff explore 
Assembly Bill (AB) 1550.   
Mr. Shikada recommended the Council consider whether it wanted additional 
work from the Ad Hoc Committees prior to the November discussion of race 
and equity.   
Mayor Fine suggested Staff respond to Council direction and check in with the 
Ad Hoc Committees prior to the November discussion. 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, noted Agenda Item Number 3A, “Approval of the 
Nomination of Council Member Alison Cormack…” was added to the Agenda. 
Oral Communications 
Stephen Rosenblum announced a rally was tentatively scheduled in case 
election results were not respected.   
Victor Ojakian expressed concern regarding the inadequacies of the existing 
Public Safety Building (PSB).  The project to construct a new PSB needed to 
proceed.  The Legislature did not pass AB 1550.   
Neva Yarkin expressed concern about the spread of the coronavirus when 
children returned to in-person school. 
Kristen Petersen, Silicon Valley Leadership Group, invited the public and 
Council Members to participate in the 16th Annual Silicon Valley Turkey Trot 
and Mayor's Cup Challenge.  The event donated more than $9.6 million to 
charity.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
Michele Lew, The Health Trust, encouraged the public to participate in the 
Turkey Trot to benefit the Meals on Wheels Program. 
Winter Dellenbach noted 2 minutes appeared to be the new time limit for the 
pubic to address the Council.  Speaking coherently on a complex topic in only 
2 minutes was difficult.  She urged the Council to allow 3 minutes when there 
were only a few speakers.   
Joshua Balogh commented on the popularity of skateboarding, which was a 
healthy and nonjudgmental activity for all ages.  He hoped the City 
constructed a new skate park. 
Sheryl Klein announced the Wilton Court affordable housing project received 
its building permits and construction financing.  She thanked City Staff for 
their assistance. 
Sam Kaplinsky supported construction of a new skate park in Palo Alto.  More 
than 2,000 people signed a petition in support of a skate park.  More people 
used skate parks than sports courts.   
Rob Levitsky believed the Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for the Castilleja 
project improperly addressed protected trees.  Staff in the Planning 
Department did not respond to his question about the trees.  The current EIR 
set a dangerous precedent for tree removal in Palo Alto. 
Arnold Matsuda supported the construction of a new skate park in Palo Alto.  
Skating and skateboarding complied with health protocols and benefited 
people of all ages and abilities. 
Aram James supported the requests for a new skate park.  The Alvarez 
incident was not a one-time event.  He encouraged the Council to hold a Study 
Session with the District Attorney.   
Curtis Smolar chastised the Council for limiting public comment to 2 minutes. 
Rebecca Eisenberg remarked that the Council was perpetuating a caste-
dominant system by appointing primarily white men to Commissions and 
Committees.  Funding for the new PSB needed to be reallocated to housing 
for the homeless.  She recommended the Council settle the lawsuit about 
Foothills Park. 
TJ Britt asked the Council to build a new skate park. 
Yanai Levin supported the construction of a skate park in Palo Alto. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
Samaoki shared his experiences at skate parks near Palo Alto and concurred 
with the requests for a new park in Palo Alto. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired regarding the Parks and Recreation Commission's 
priority for a skate park. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, indicated Staff would report to the Council.  The 
Council may want to refer a skate park to the Parks and Recreation 
Commission. 
Council Member Kniss requested Ms. Klein be allowed to repeat her comments. 
Council Member Cormack advised that she emailed Ms. Klein with a request 
to submit her comments in writing.  Ms. Klein responded with an apology for 
the technical difficulties and agreement to comment in writing. 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 3. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 2-3A. 
Rebecca Eisenberg, addressing Agenda Item Number 3, believed the Council 
violated the Brown Act by placing controversial items on the Consent 
Calendar.  The agreement benefited the developer only.   
Curtis Smolar, addressing Agenda Item Number 3, remarked that removing 
the lien was outrageous and did not benefit the City. 
2. 
Adoption of Several Ordinances Regarding Accessory Dwelling Units and 
Junior Accessory Dwelling Units Amending Palo Alto Municipal Code 
Titles 16 (Building); Ordinance 5507 Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council 
of the City of Palo Alto Amending Title 18 (Zoning);” Amendments 
Include Repealing Section 18.42.040 (Accessory and Junior Accessory 
Dwelling Units) and Adding a new Chapter 18.09 (Accessory Dwelling 
Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units), and Updating Chapters 
18.04 (Definitions), 16.58 (Development Impact Fees); Ordinance 5508 
Entitled, “Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Amending 
Title 16.04 (California Building Code);” Ordinance 5509 Entitled, 
“Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Amending Title 16.06 
(California Residential Code);” and Ordinance 5510 Entitled, “Ordinance 
of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Amending Title 16.14 (California 
Green Building Standards Code) (FIRST READING: October 5, 2020 
PASSED: 7-0).” 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
3. 
QUASI-JUDICIAL. 567 Maybell Avenue [15PLN-00248]: Adoption of a 
Resolution 9920 Entitled “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Authorizing the City Manager to Amend an Existing Agreement 
Securing a Lien for the Deferral of Affordable Housing In-lieu Fees and 
Development Impact Fees for a Project That Includes the Development 
of 16 Single-family Homes.” The Applicant Proposes Payment of Fees in 
Installments, Prior to Final Occupancy. Environmental Assessment: not 
a Project. Zoning Districts R-2 and RM-15. 
3A.  Approval of the Nomination of Council Member Alison Cormack to the 
Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) Board. 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 2 AND 3A:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 3:  6-1 Kou no 
Council Member Kou agreed with deferring the in-lieu fee but not the 
Development Impact Fees.  The interest rate seemed extremely low.  This was 
a poor precedent to set. 
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported 618 people were tested for COVID-19 on 
October 23, 2020.  Upcoming dates for testing were November 6 and 20 and 
December 4 and 18, 2020.  Red flag warnings were in effect, and Public Safety 
Power Shutoffs were possible in areas served by PG&E.  Low-risk Halloween 
celebrations were encouraged.  City events included a Jack-O-Jaunt, a Public 
Art Scavenger Hunt, a Scarecrow Art Kit, and social media contests.  
Registered voters needed to return election ballots by mail, drop box, or in 
person.   
Council Member Kniss encouraged the public to be tested for COVID-19. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about the Police Department's response to 
recent home burglaries. 
Mr. Shikada reminded residents to lock doors and windows and to secure their 
property.  The Police Department was investigating the burglaries and 
increasing patrols. 
Council took a break at 8:24 P.M. and returned at 8:42 P.M. 
Action Items 
4. 
Direction to Modify the California Avenue Parking Policy to Expand 
Eligibility for City Garage Parking Permits and Modify the Evergreen Park 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
Mayfield Residential Preferential Parking (RPP) Program to Reduce 
Employee Parking in the RPP District (THIS ITEM HAS BEEN MOVED TO 
NOVEMBER 9, 2020). 
4A.  Consideration of Recommendations by the City Council Ad Hoc on 
Boards, Commissions and Committees (BCCs), Including Adopting a 
Handbook, Establishing Training, and Direction on Further Changes 
Including Term Limits and Reducing the Parks and Recreation 
Commission to Five Members. 
Mayor Fine discouraged speakers who addressed this item the prior week from 
speaking again. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported the item before the Council was 
consideration and discussion of the proposed handbook.  Feedback regarding 
the establishment of a handbook was positive.  The Ad Hoc Committee on 
Boards, Commissions, and Committees (BCC) was established in December 
2019, conducted a survey in December 2019, and provided a status update in 
February 2020.  The handbook required training, established a process to 
remove a member, established attendance standards, required the adoption 
of annual workplans, suggested term limits, implemented changes to the 
recruitment and application processes, required adherence to a Code of 
Conduct, and established additional Council expectations for members.  
Handbooks from other agencies were used to draft the proposed handbook.   
Council Member Cormack reviewed the objective of the Ad Hoc Committee.   
Vice Mayor DuBois indicated some of the handbook language needed to be 
refined to capture intent.  Most of the Ad Hoc Committee's work was complete.  
If Council Members wanted substantive changes to the handbook, the Ad Hoc 
Committee was available to incorporate changes.  He proposed clarifying the 
provision regarding speaking with the press to reflect that comments to the 
press were personal opinions.  The intent of workplans was to align the work 
of BCCs with Council objectives.  The Ad Hoc Committee added language 
regarding removal of a member in order to provide clarification.   
Curtis Smolar remarked that the provision preventing private citizens from 
speaking to the press violated the First Amendment.  Members were chosen 
because they supported political views.  The handbook was designed to stymie 
public discourse.   
Pat Burt recommended the Council address the role of Council Liaisons, public 
disclosure of communications, advocacy, speaking with the media, and 
removal from office.  The language for the role of Council Liaison needed to 
be strengthened.  The requirement for disclosures exceeded the Council's 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
protocols.  BCC members were not responsible for representing the Council's 
official policies and positions.  The Chief Communications Officer should be a 
resource for BCC members.  Removal of a BCC member should not be based 
on arbitrary reasons.   
Winter Dellenbach agreed with requiring training and providing support to BCC 
members.  BCC members should be allowed to speak with the press if they 
clearly indicated for whom they spoke.  Removing a member for no cause was 
a concern.   
Sam Kaplinsky asked the Council to prioritize and refer a skate park to the 
Parks and Recreation Commission. 
Council Member Kniss requested the rationale for not referring the handbook 
to the Policy and Services Committee. 
Vice Mayor DuBois recalled the December 2019 Council discussion and 
decision not to refer a handbook to the Policy and Services Committee in the 
interest of time.   
Council Member Kniss preferred the Policy and Services Committee review the 
handbook.  Overall, the handbook was wonderful.  She objected to the ability 
to remove a member for no reason.  Mr. Burt's proposal for removal was 
feasible.  The Ad Hoc Committee needed to revise the handbook. 
Council Member Cormack noted survey comments regarding training were 
significant.  Training beyond the Brown Act was helpful.  Adoption of a 
workplan addressed survey comments about Council interests and objectives.  
The Ad Hoc Committee proposed revisions to the applications.  The Council 
needed to discuss the process and timing for recruitments, term limits, 
reducing the number of Parks and Recreation Commission members, student 
representatives, and attendance for Council Liaisons.  Public comment 
provided good suggestions for revising the removal process and speaking with 
the press. 
Mayor Fine suggested the Council may need to return to holding recruitment 
in the spring.  He supported a limit of two terms.  He did not believe there 
was a problem with Council Liaisons.  BCC members may speak with the press 
if they stated whom they represented.  He did not support removal of a 
member without a reason and a hearing. 
Council Member Kou concurred with training for members, requiring a reason 
for removing a member, attendance requirements for BCC members and 
Council Liaisons, adopting a workplan, setting term limits, moving recruitment 
to the spring, maintaining seven members on the Parks and Recreation 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
Commission, and appointing student representatives.  The Ad Hoc Committee 
needed to revise the handbook based on Council comments. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed with comments regarding requiring a reason 
to remove a member, members speaking with the press if they indicated 
whom they represented, student representatives, and referring the handbook 
to the Policy and Services Committee.  The Council needed to utilize BCCs 
more and rely on their recommendations.  Perhaps the Council needed to 
consider allowing individual Council Members to appoint members to BCCs.  
He opposed reducing the number of Parks and Recreation Commission 
members. 
Council Member Filseth concurred with recruiting in the spring and maintaining 
the number of Parks and Recreation Commission members.  Guidelines for 
removing members were needed.  Term limits had pros and cons.   
Vice Mayor DuBois noted consensus around revising the provision for speaking 
to the press, recruiting in the spring, and maintaining the Parks and Recreation 
Commission at seven members.  The Council needed to set a term limit and 
clarify the role of the Council Liaison.  Removing a member for his political 
views  was not appropriate.  Including a hearing in the removal process was 
not necessary.  Student representatives with advisory votes were a good idea.  
The disclosure provision applied to quasi-judicial hearings.  The language 
regarding the role of BCC members needed refining.   
Mayor Fine indicated additional discussion was needed for term limits and 
removal.  Two or three Council Members needed to present a memo 
requesting the removal of a BCC member.  If a majority of Council Members 
voted to remove a member, the member would be removed.   
Molly Stump, City Attorney, concurred with the removal process outlined by 
the Mayor. 
Mayor Fine related that the Council discussion was the hearing, and the BCC 
member was allowed to address the Council.  Workplans were a great idea to 
align BCCs with the Council.  BCCs addressing ad hoc issues was fine if the 
issues did not drain staff time.  He inquired whether the Ad Hoc Committee 
needed further direction. 
Council Member Cormack did not believe the Ad Hoc Committee needed 
further direction to revise the handbook.  If the Council referred the handbook 
to the Policy and Services Committee, the Policy and Services Committee 
would have to familiarize themselves with the details before revising the 
handbook. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked the City Attorney to comment regarding a hearing 
for removal of a BCC member. 
Ms. Stump reported a hearing was not provided in the removal process.  If 
the facts and circumstances of removing a BCC member could affect the BCC 
member's reputation, the member had a right under the law to be heard.   
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired regarding an onerous removal process.   
Ms. Stump advised that the customary rule was that the governing board 
maintained discretion to make a decision in the way that it wished.  In her 
experience with cities, decisions were not based on a whim.  The governing 
board's action resolved the matter.   
Council Member Kniss indicated she learned from Council Members in Menlo 
Park, Sunnyvale and Mountain View and Supervisor Simitian that the person 
in charge of the jurisdiction, either the Chair or the Mayor, spoke with the 
person subject to removal.  The person typically did not resist removal after 
such a conversation.  Mr. Burt's comments about the reasons for removal were 
quite good.  Based on comments from Parks and Recreation Commissioners, 
she preferred to maintain seven members.  BCC members should be allowed 
to speak to the media as long as they stated they were not speaking for the 
BCC.  Student representatives were a good idea.  The handbook appeared to 
be a mix of training and policies.  She inquired regarding the person 
designated to lead BCC training. 
Council Member Cormack stated the City Manager's Office with assistance 
from the City Attorney and BCC Staff liaisons.   
Vice Mayor DuBois added that the proposal was intended to elevate the 
existing training.   
Council Member Kniss asked if all BCC members received the same training. 
Council Member Cormack replied yes.  BCC Chairs and Vice Chairs needed 
specific training for meeting management. 
Ms. Stump advised that the Historic Resources Board (HRB), Architectural 
Review Board (ARB), and Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) 
needed training on quasi-judicial matters.  The Staff liaison provided 
customized training for each BCC.   
Council Member Kniss asked if training included ethics and discrimination. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
Ms. Stump reported the Council required BCC members to attend ethics and 
conflict of interest training every other year.  The training was intended to 
support individuals as BCC members.   
Council Member Kniss remarked that there needed to be a general 
understanding that it was easy for Council Liaisons to become attached to and 
to inappropriately persuade their assigned BCCs. 
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Mayor Fine to direct 
the Ad Hoc Committee to return to Council with proposed revisions discussed 
tonight. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed the Ad Hoc Committee work with BCCs to 
craft the revisions.  Perhaps the Council wished to impose term limits only if 
there were sufficient applicants and to allow BCC members to request agenda 
items.  He proposed amending the Motion to refer a skate park study to the 
Parks and Recreation Commission. 
Council Member Filseth declined the Amendment. 
Ms. Stump advised that a skate park was not part of the Agenda Item. 
Council Member Filseth suggested a skate park needed to be included in the 
Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan.   
Council Member Kou requested the recruitment and interview process take 
into consideration that BCCs developed workplans at the beginning of the 
year.  She inquired whether the Council agreed to maintain seven Parks and 
Recreation Commissioners. 
Mayor Fine related that a majority of the Council seemed to support seven 
members. 
Council Member Kou asked if the Ad Hoc Committee intended to explore a 
residency requirement for BCCs. 
Council Member Cormack indicated the Ad Hoc Committee reviewed BCC 
requirements and made no changes.  Residency was specifically not required 
for some BCCs in order to obtain specific expertise and to allow owners of Palo 
Alto businesses to participate in BCCs.   
Vice Mayor DuBois added that a residency requirement had not been an issue.   
Council Member Kou suggested the Ad Hoc Committee consider a requirement 
to rotate the offices of Chair and Vice Chair based on length of service on the 
BCC.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  10/26/2020 
Council Member Cormack did not recall any survey responses listing that as 
an issue.   
Vice Mayor DuBois agreed that it was not an issue.  He requested a discussion 
of timing appointments with developing workplans.   
Council Member Kou proposed the handbook state the number of absences 
considered excessive.   
Mayor Fine suggested removal of a BCC member require a supermajority vote 
of the Council.  Workplans could be better aligned with the fiscal year.   
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Mayor Fine encouraged residents to obtain COVID-19 testing, to enjoy 
Halloween safely, and to vote. 
Vice Mayor DuBois shared his experiences with being tested at Stanford. 
Council Member Kniss inquired regarding the requirements to obtain a test. 
Vice Mayor DuBois advised that he obtained appointments through the app.  
A physician referral was not needed. 
Mayor Fine added that patients of Palo Alto Medical Foundation (PAMF) and 
Sutter were being tested with no requirements. 
Council Member Kniss acknowledged the birth of Mayor Fine's son. 
Council Member Kou reported Stanford University was relocating its real estate 
department to Redwood City and planned to demolish the building.  Sand Hill 
Road and Alpine were going to be impacted.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:09 P.M. 
