CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 16 
Regular Meeting 
April 13, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date via a virtual 
teleconference at 6:07 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Action Item 
1. 
Update and Discussion of the COVID-19 Health Emergency and the 
City's Response – Verbal Report, No Written Staff Report. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager shared a video produced by the Palo Alto Youth 
Council (PAYC).   
Ken Dueker, Director of the Office of Emergency Services reported key 
objectives for the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) were to maintain 
essential services, stay current with the public health order and emerging 
best practices, anticipate likely outcomes and document eligibility for Federal 
and State reimbursement.   
Steve Palmer, Vice President Van Scoyoc Associates advised that Congress 
had passed three major bills addressing the public health crisis.  The City 
was possibly eligible for funding through the Coronavirus Relief Fund.  
Congress was debating additional funding for the Payroll Protection Program 
(PPP).  Senator Schumer and Speaker Pelosi were advocating for $150 billion 
in funding for State and local governments.  There was strong interest in an 
Infrastructure Bill.  He was working with Congresswoman Eshoo to obtain 
funding for smaller communities like the City.  The Mayor sent 
Congresswoman Eshoo a request to cosponsor a bill that would create $250 
billion for State and local governments.  He had been working with the 
National League of Cities and the Conference of Mayors to reduce the 
threshold for Federal funding.   
Niccolo De Luca, Senior Director of Northern California Townsend Public 
Affairs, indicated on March 16, 2020 the State Legislature passed two bills 
authorizing Governor Newsom to spend up to $1.1 billion in response to the 
pandemic and then recessed until May 4, 2020.  The Governor issued more 
than 20 Executive Orders and was providing daily updates.  Routine 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
legislative deadlines were no longer in place.  When the Legislature 
returned, it was going to focus on COVID-19, homelessness and wildfires.  
With income taxes due on July 15, 2020 a greater understanding of State 
revenues could occur by the end of August, 2020.  He continued to advocate 
for funding for the City.  The Governor had proposed a Sales Tax bridge 
loan, a California Department of Tax and Fee Administration (CDTFA) 90-day 
tax extension and a California small business loan guaranty program. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about a Federal program for housing assistance 
vouchers.   
Mr. Palmer related that the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security 
(CARES) Act contained a great deal of funding for housing programs. 
Mr. De Luca noted discussion in State government about a pool of funds for 
rental assistance.  An official statement had not been prepared, but 
memoranda seemed to indicate the Legislature was going to use an 
expedited process and reduce the number of bills introduced when it 
returned in May, 2020.  One or two housing bills was able to be introduced, 
but they were likely be pushed to 2021. 
Vice Mayor DuBois hoped the schedule for the Regional Housing Needs 
Allocation (RHNA) would be adjusted so that cities had time to provide input.   
Mr. De Luca advised that many timelines had been pushed back.  He 
anticipated Budget Trailer Bills and other bills that would contain timeline 
extensions.   
Vice Mayor DuBois requested updates regarding State assistance for local 
businesses. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about actions the City could take prior to 
April 24, 2020 to encourage the distribution of County of Santa Clara 
(County) funds to local governments. 
Mr. Palmer recommended the City work with the County to ensure the Board 
of Supervisors understood the needs of the City. 
Council Member Cormack asked if special Community Development Block 
Grant (CDBG) funding would have the same restrictions as regular funding. 
Mr. Palmer reported the Department of Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD) was granting enormous flexibility for the use of special CDBG funding. 
Council Member Kou hoped State legislation would consider the various 
categories of homelessness so that treatment as well as housing could be 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
provided.  She inquired whether the City received greenhouse gas reduction 
funding from the State. 
Mr. De Luca did not know. 
Council Member Filseth asked if a timeframe for the PPP had been 
announced. 
Mr. Palmer advised that banks had initiated the program but encountered 
numerous problems.  The Treasury Department expected the program to 
expend all its funds by Friday.  Small businesses had not accessed the 
program as quickly as large businesses.  Small businesses that had 
relationships with large banks appeared to receive loans quickly.  
Council Member Kniss inquired about the City's role in seeking additional 
funding for healthcare and homeless issues. 
Mr. De Luca suggested working with the City's legislative delegation to get 
carve-out language stating cities can receive State Homeless Funds, working 
with the County to address issues, or seeking a portion of the County's 
allocation of State Homeless Funds as a sub-grantee of the County.  The 
COVID-19 response had demonstrated the need to obtain funding quickly.   
Council Member Kniss noted the Cities Association was discussing the issue.  
Any help was appreciated because obtaining County funding was extremely 
difficult. 
Mr. Palmer added that Congressional Democrats were advocating for an 
additional $53 billion in CDBG funding, and the requirements for use of 
CDBG funding was flexible.  Obtaining funding through the CARES Act was 
extremely competitive and difficult.   
Council Member Tanaka was pleased to learn that additional funding may be 
allocated to the PPP.  He inquired about possible funding amounts the City 
was able to receive through State and Federal programs. 
Mr. Palmer reported Senate Republicans and President Trump were not 
agreeable to providing funding for State and local governments.  The CDBG 
grants were the first funds available to smaller cities like Palo Alto.   
Council Member Tanaka requested a rough estimate of the amount of CDBG 
funding the City might receive if the additional $53 billion was appropriated. 
Mr. Palmer was not comfortable guessing because there was no feeling in 
Congress that local governments should get more funding. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
Mr. De Luca explained that the deficit facing the State was unknown, and the 
State was going to have to backfill their lost revenues.  The City needed to 
develop a clear story of why they needed funding.   
Mayor Fine asked how the City was able to position itself effectively for 
potentially upcoming things and inquired about the number of rounds of 
Federal funding packages that could be initiated. 
Mr. Palmer did not know the number of rounds of Federal funding.  Congress 
was more interested in supporting local governments to fight the pandemic; 
therefore, focusing on the City's actions, costs and aid to residents in 
response to the pandemic was beneficial.   
Mr. De Luca suggested the City develop a story of their housing initiatives, 
explaining how they could be at risk because of the pandemic and relate the 
effects to the City and the region.   
Council Member Filseth inquired whether anyone was discussing pension 
liabilities. 
Mr. De Luca indicated he was not hearing much on the topic. 
Mr. Shikada reported regarding the redeployment of Staff, the realignment 
of workforce duties, rotation of week on/week off assignments for essential 
Staff, 
preparation 
for 
community 
recovery, 
administrative 
work, 
requirements for use of administrative leave, workforce near-term priorities, 
use of administrative leave and business support and assistance.  On 
April 20, 2020 he was going to transmit the Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 Proposed 
Budget.  In April and May, 2020, the Finance Committee were going to 
consider utility rates.  In May, 2020 the Council was going to hold Budget 
hearings with adoption of the Budget scheduled for June 22, 2020.  At the 
Council's direction, Staff was developing a recovery strategy and a program 
for small business financial support.   
Council Member Kniss asked about Staff's work with neighboring cities. 
Mr. Shikada advised that Staff was checking in with neighboring cities and 
working with the County regularly. 
Council Member Kniss related that the Mayor of a neighboring city had 
expressed to her a hope for collaboration among cities to obtain funding 
from the County.  She inquired about a potential timeframe for the City 
Manager to present a permanent Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 Budget. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
Mr. Shikada stated some financial impacts would be known in June and more 
impacts would be learned over time.  Staff was likely going to present the 
Council with a range of options. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired about a Utility Bill Relief Program for 
businesses.   
Mr. Shikada noted commercial and residential programs for deferral of utility 
bill payments were in place, and messaging was saturated with information 
by Wednesday of last week. 
Meghan Horrigan-Taylor, Public Information Manager reported information 
about both programs was posted to the City website and shared in e-blasts 
and social media the prior week. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the programs deferred or forgave bill 
payment. 
Dean Batchelor, Utilities Director advised that the programs only deferred 
payment at the current time.  Determinations about additional actions for 
customers would be made at a later time.   
Mr. Shikada clarified that the utilities operated as enterprises, and 
forgiveness of bills would result in additional costs for the other ratepayers.  
In recognition of the state of emergency, Staff proposed 0 percent rate 
increases for FY 2021, and the Utilities Advisory Commission (UAC) and 
Finance Committee were to review proposed rates in the next few weeks.   
Council Member Tanaka wanted Staff to forgive utility bills, as Mountain 
View had, because residents were hurting.  He inquired about enforcement 
of the charge for paper shopping bags because customers could not utilize 
their reusable shopping bags due to the pandemic.   
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director indicated Staff was not enforcing the 
charge.  The purpose of the charge was to reimburse stores for the cost of 
paper bags.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about enforcement of parking restrictions. 
Mr. Shikada indicated Staff was not enforcing time-limited parking, but the 
Police Department continued to focus on safety-related parking issues.   
Council Member Tanaka related that residents had informed him about the 
lack of response to their complaints about a recreational vehicles (RV) 
parked in Greenmeadow.   
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
Robert Jonsen, Police Chief indicated he was familiar with the complaints, 
and Staff had responded.  A count of RVs over the weekend found about half 
of the RVs on El Camino were gone.   
Council Member Cormack inquired regarding the role of childcare in 
preparation for recovery, especially regarding summer camps. 
Kristen O’Kane, Director of Community Services reported she and Ms. van 
der Zwaag were meeting regularly with nonprofit childcare providers, trying 
to coordinate services.  Staff was exploring three scenarios for summer 
camps:  starting summer camps prior to June; starting summer camps in 
June; and offering more camps with fewer participants in each camp. 
Council Member Cormack expressed concern about vehicles speeding on City 
streets. 
Mr. Jonsen advised that enforcement had increased over the weekend and 
resulted in a couple of Driving Under the Influence (DUI) arrests.   
Council Member Cormack requested comment regarding requests to close 
streets to vehicles. 
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official reported Staff was reviewing 
opportunities to close some streets to local traffic, which could increase 
safety.   
Council Member Cormack noted gardening continued to be an issue and 
asked if Emergency Services Volunteers (ESV) could handle the issue. 
Mr. Dueker understood neighborhoods had been sharing gardening tools and 
indicated ESVs could foster more sharing. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about City Staff utilizing the Care.com service. 
Mr. Shikada explained that the City was partnering with Care.com to provide 
childcare for essential workers.  As an employer, the City needed to be 
flexible in accommodating Staff's ability to work and care for school-age 
children.  It was possible that the partnership could alleviate Staff's need to 
use Administrative Leave. 
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested Staff consider a rent moratorium or reduction 
for Cubberley tenants and a future discussion related to social distancing 
practices and additional services for the Palo Alto Shuttle.   
Mr. Kamhi related that the Shuttle was operating on its regular schedule 
with 20-30 passengers per day.  While usage was not high, passengers 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
appeared to be taking the Shuttle for essential trips or to reach essential 
work.  The contractor was sanitizing buses daily and encouraging social 
distancing on buses.   
Vice Mayor DuBois stated there could be more cost-effective ways to provide 
transportation because of low ridership.   
Mr. Kamhi reported Staff had considered Uber vouchers or on-demand 
service but believed both would cause more demand and increase costs.  If 
service was reduced or stopped, Staff had concerns about returning service. 
Vice Mayor DuBois expressed interest in learning about ideas for closing 
streets.   
Mr. Kamhi explained Oakland's program for closing streets and designating 
bikeways.   
Vice Mayor DuBois suggested the current time could be an opportunity to 
contact homeless people and better understand their needs.   
Mayor Fine noted Oakland was using citizen volunteers to enforce street 
closures.  Education before enforcement with respect to the prohibition 
against gardening was appropriate.  The County released information 
indicating 60 or 61 Palo Alto residents were infected with coronavirus, and 
he was attempting to obtain more information.   
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Study Session 
1. 
Annual Earth Day Report Study Session. 
Christine Luong, Sustainability Manager recalled the City's goal of an 80 
percent reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2030.  AECOM was 
going to assist Staff with completing the 2019 GHG inventory, and the 
results would be included in the 2020 Sustainability and Climate Action Plan 
(S/CAP) Study Session tentatively planned for the fall.  For the second 
consecutive year, the City had achieved the Carbon Disclosure Project's 
(CDP) “A list” for implementing a Climate Action Plan and progressing toward 
achieving climate goals.  Progress in 2019 included all-electric building 
requirements, the Multifamily Building Gas Furnace Retrofit Pilot Program, an 
induction cooktop loaner program, elimination of gas incineration of sewage 
sludge, establishment of the Office of Transportation, participation in and 
advocacy for regional transit programs, increased active transportation mode 
share for school commutes, a Housing Workplan Implementation Ordinance, 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
an electric vehicle (EV) workplan, a $1 million CALeVIP grant, the addition of 
EVs to the City fleet, use of a full-sized, all-electric waste collection truck, a 
customer survey on EV adoption barriers, co-sponsorship of workshops and 
ride-and-drive events, a partnership with Valley Water, a Green Stormwater 
Infrastructure (GSI) Plan, identification of water reuse alternatives, a Sea 
Level Rise Adaptation Policy, preliminary design of a Horizontal Levee Pilot 
Project, a Regional Water Quality Control Plant Primary Outfall Project, flood 
basin tide gate repairs, a Tree Line USA award, an Urban Forest Plan second 
edition, an initiative to plant trees in South Palo Alto, a Disposable Foodware 
Ordinance, 
transition 
to 
reusable 
foodware, 
a 
Deconstruction 
and 
Construction Materials Management Ordinance and expansion of the 
Household Hazardous Waste Reuse Zone.   
David Page encouraged the Council to do more sooner and had submitted 
written suggestions that could reduce pollution and save money. 
Susan Chamberlain, 350 Silicon Valley/Palo Alto City Team remarked that 
the current S/CAP was not going to achieve the 80 percent reduction goal by 
2030 and needed to be more aggressive.   
Arthur Keller commented that Staff undercut the all-electric mandate with a 
pre-application process.  Constructing housing near transit would not reduce 
car trips.  The Council needed to reconvene the EV Task Force.  Conduit for 
EV charging stations needed to be included in the construction of parking 
garages.  He suggested the City should partner with agencies to conduct a 
study of sea level rise adaptation.   
Council Member Filseth inquired about a quantitative analysis of each 
program that would lead to achieving the City's goals.   
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director explained that development of the 
S/CAP had included assumptions about the accomplishments of programs, 
but year-by-year goals were not prepared.  AECOM was going to analyze 
existing programs and new concepts in their update of the S/CAP. 
Council Member Filseth appreciated a year-by-year analysis but felt a 
quantitative analysis was more useful.   
Council Member Cormack questioned whether the City was on track to meet 
their goals.  Setting goals for AECOM was important.  Hopefully, Staff was 
able to present a range of scenarios that would help the Council assess 
potential changes. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois commented on the growth of renewable energy and 
asked about the method used to forecast the production and cost of energy 
for the next ten years. 
Christine Tam, Senior Resource Planner advised that forecasts for costs were 
based on the City's long-term contracts for renewable energy. 
Vice Mayor DuBois hoped the City was doing enough to protect and extend 
the tree canopy.  He inquired about the source of data for mobility and 
wondered if progress could be tracked better. 
Mr. Eggleston explained that emission reductions based on EV adoption had 
been included in inventories.   
Sylvia Star-Lack, Transportation Manager added that Staff obtained data 
from the Downtown Commute Survey and hoped to improve data collection 
for mobility. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if EV ownership data was taken from the survey. 
Ms. Star-Lack clarified that EV ownership data was obtained from the 
California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired about the availability of more recent data. 
Mr. Eggleston indicated EV penetration data was compiled for 2019. 
Council Member Kniss asked if anyone had noticed the sky was a different 
color due to the reduction in air pollution. 
Mr. Eggleston replied yes. 
Council Member Kniss remarked that air quality over the past few months 
had been some of the best ever.  She asked if the number of EVs in Palo Alto 
could be attributed to the nearby location of the Tesla manufacturing plant. 
Ms. Loung answered yes, 62 percent of new EV sales in 2017 were Tesla’s. 
Council Member Kniss inquired about the number of trees to be planted in 
South Palo Alto. 
Mr. Eggleston advised that the goal was 10,000 trees. 
Council Member Kniss asked about the number that had been planted. 
Mr. Eggleston explained that a couple hundred trees were planted annually. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
Mayor Fine remarked that the City would not reach their climate goals if they 
did not reach their housing goals.   
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None. 
Oral Communications 
Dan Gordon remarked that he was leaving the restaurant business after 32 
years in Palo Alto.  Business had been declining over the past eight years 
and he was not going to recover from the health emergency.  The Council 
was able to help Palo Alto's restaurants recover by reducing the minimum 
wage to State levels. 
Mayor Fine thanked Mr. Gordon for serving Palo Alto for many years. 
David Page noted Palo Alto had not made any progress in terms of the 
amount of pollution discharged into the air.  He thought the City should not 
take credit for the community's decisions.  The City was able to create less 
pollution and save money by attending virtual meetings. 
Anthony requested additional information concerning Mayor Fine's comment 
about the City reaching housing and climate goals. 
Consent Calendar 
Ed Shikada, City Manager reported the Staff recommendation for Agenda 
Item Number 3A should apply to all Council Appointed Officers. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 3A. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 3 and 3A. 
3. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Approval of a Finding That the Public Safety 
Building Project (CIP PE-15001) is "Substantially Complex" Under 
Public Contract Code Section 7201 and Direction to Increase the 
Retention Schedule from Five Percent to Ten Percent. 
3A.  Council Delegation of its Authority to the Council Appointed Officers to 
Authorize Emergency Leave of Absence With Pay to Address the 
Workforce Needs to Respond to COVID-19, for a Period Not to Extend 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
Beyond the Pay Period Including June 30,2020, Per the City Merit 
System Rules and Regulations, Section 808. 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 3:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 3A:  6-1 Tanaka no 
Council Member Tanaka shared a comparison of idle employees for Palo Alto, 
Millbrae, Daly, Cupertino, and San Mateo.  The Council had a responsibility 
to understand the cost of the item, but Staff had not supplied that 
information. 
City Manager Comments 
None. 
Council took a break at 8:40 P.M. and returned at 8:50 P.M. 
Action Items 
4. Review the 2020 Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) 
Update Process and Accept the 2020-2021 Sustainability Work Plan 
(Continued from March 23, 2020). 
Brad Eggleston, Director of Public Works advised that ideas from public 
comments submitted over the past week would be included in the 
Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) Update. 
Christine Luong, Sustainability Manager reported the 2020 S/CAP Update 
process and the 2020-2021 Sustainability Work Plan were drafted prior to 
the pandemic.  Some of the tools and strategies used to confront the 
pandemic could be used to address climate change impacts.  By the end of 
2018, Palo Alto reduced greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by an estimated 
36 percent from the 1990 baseline.  As a bridging strategy, carbon offsets 
were being purchased in an amount equal to the GHG emissions caused by 
natural gas used in the City.  If natural gas offsets were included, GHG 
emissions had decreased about 56.5 percent, but natural gas use had not 
really changed in the past few years.  To achieve the 80 percent reduction 
goal by 2030, Palo Alto needed to reduce GHG emissions by 300,000 metric 
tons of CO2 equivalent from the current emission levels.  For continued 
progress towards goals and targets, the City needed to update its S/CAP to 
study the highest impact actions.  Potential goals and key actions were 
intended to be a starting point for discussion.  Each S/CAP area was to 
include goals and key actions.  The scheduled community meeting was 
restructured as an eight-part prerecorded, on-demand webinar.  The 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
webinar launched March 31, 2020 and would close the following day.  The 
community was able to provide comments through the webinar.  To date, 
147 people had participated in the webinar.  Feedback from the webinar and 
written comments would be posted on the website by April 21, 2020.  Staff 
was going to hold area-specific public meetings prior to a summit in the fall, 
2020.  Once goals and key actions were refined, AECOM would perform an 
impact analysis, which would detail costs and expected GHG emission 
reductions and sustainability benefits.  AECOM was also going to conduct a 
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review.  Hopefully, an updated 
S/CAP was going to be ready for Council review in a year.  AECOM's tasks 
included Citywide GHG emissions inventories for 2019, 2020, 2021; 
calculation of transportation-related emissions; a business as usual forecast; 
a GHG emissions reductions and sustainability benefits impact analysis; 
community engagement; and preparation of environmental documents.  The 
2020 priority projects included a Utilities Electrification Work Plan, a 
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Ordinance, Electric Vehicle (EV) 
charging infrastructure, a Green Stormwater Infrastructure (GSI) Plan, a Sea 
Level Rise Adaptation Plan, a potential local Carbon Storage Program and 
policies, and enforcement of the Disposable Foodware Ordinance and 
Deconstruction Ordinance. 
Arthur Keller believed the City needed to adopt a solar investment access 
ordinance, review the amount of reduction in GHG, to inventory and enforce 
existing TDM Programs, explore scenarios for Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT) 
and promote integrated pest management and composting.   
David Page remarked that the S/CAP Update was an embarrassment and 
suggested the City utilize the California Air Resources Board's (CARB) carbon 
footprint calculator. 
David Coale indicated Staff should provide the reductions needed each year 
to reach an 80 percent reduction by 2030.   
Shannon McEntee suggested the City require or incentivize the addition of 
EV charging stations to older multifamily buildings.   
Council Member Kniss advised that the pandemic could dramatically change 
the community.  She agreed with the need to install EV charging stations in 
multifamily buildings.  CARB had set a goal to be diesel free by 2073.  
Reducing natural gas usage by half was going to be a challenge.   
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka to accept the 2020-2021 Sustainability Work Plan. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
Council Member Tanaka concurred with Council Member Kniss' comments.  
Progress toward goals was needed, but there were constraints.   
Council Member Cormack asked who would choose the goals and actions and 
when. 
Ms. Luong explained that AECOM would prepare the impact analysis, the 
Council would provide direction for reaching goals and the community would 
provide input at the summit.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the current meeting was the Council's only 
opportunity to provide direction on goals and actions prior to AECOM 
beginning the impact analysis. 
Mr. Eggleston answered yes, but the Council could direct Staff to return at a 
future date. 
Council Member Cormack requested Staff investigate on-bill financing, work-
from-home days, and increasing EV penetration.  She wanted Staff to look at 
the destination and work backwards.  She inquired about a timeframe for 
Council review of a Sea Level Rise Adaptation Plan. 
Mr. Eggleston indicated the original plan was to present a Sea Level Rise 
Adaptation Plan by the end of the calendar year.   
Council Member Cormack felt the City was making appropriate movements 
for environmental sustainability and Zero Waste.  She inquired about lessons 
learned from the webinar.   
Ms. Luong indicated an on-demand webinar was better.  Future webinars 
were to be the recorded version with a link to provide feedback.  Public 
feedback concerned length of webinars, inclusion of presentation slides, and 
more opportunities for feedback. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to direct Staff to return with an interim report 
before summer break and before AECOM does an impact analysis of goals 
and key actions. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if AECOM's analysis would result in metrics. 
Mr. Eggleston clarified that AECOM would prepare a 2019 inventory, and the 
Council would review key actions and new programs that could accomplish 
the 80 by '30 goal.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if AECOM would focus on solely VMT. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
Sylvia Star-Lack, Transportation Manager reported State law required a VMT 
analysis, but the Comprehensive Plan required an LOS analysis.  Both 
analyses would be performed. 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted the renewable energy landscape had changed 
greatly over the past ten years and could have an impact on the next ten 
years.  The focus needed to be increasing the EV adoption rate, and he 
suggested all replacement cars Citywide should be electric.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired about potential incentives for continued 
telecommuting after the shelter-in-place order was lifted.   
Mr. Eggleston commented that telecommuting would likely continue as 
workers had learned to telecommute or increased the efficiency of 
telecommuting.   
Council Member Tanaka inquired about integrating GHG emissions 
reductions from transportation with increasing the mode share for bicycling. 
Ms. Star-Lack explained that existing key actions concerned reducing single-
occupancy vehicle (SOV) commuting and VMT.  The safer biking was, the 
more likely people would bike.  A TDM Ordinance was able to address 
incentives for telecommuting.  Staff was exploring micro mobility options. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested Staff look into the Stanford University or 
Stanford Research Park program which paid employees to bike to work.   
Council Member Kou asked if GHG emissions were tracked during the 
pandemic. 
Mr. Eggleston responded no.  The City fleet's usage of fuel had decreased 30 
percent during the pandemic. 
Council Member Kou suggested a baseline of GHG emissions from 
commuters into Palo Alto was useful.   
Mr. Eggleston advised that a model of VMT into and out of Palo Alto was part 
of AECOM's analysis. 
Mr. Shikada reported Staff could check with regional agencies to learn about 
their data collection.   
Council Member Kou asked if emissions at Palo Alto Airport would be 
measured. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
Ms. Luong clarified that airport emissions were not included in past 
inventories, but would be in future inventories. 
Mayor Fine inquired about programs for on-bill financing. 
Christine Tam, Senior Resource Planner, explained that the Utilities billing 
system did not support on-bill financing.  An upgrade to the billing system 
was going to be complete in two to three years, at which time on-bill 
financing was possible. 
Mayor Fine wanted to accelerate the ability to offer on-bill financing. 
Ms. Tam indicated Staff could explore financing options. 
Mayor Fine believed some mobility accomplishments had been significant 
and inquired about the use of negative reinforcement such as paid parking 
and congestion pricing to discourage SOV trips.   
Ms. Star-Lack related that Staff's work plan included paid parking 
Downtown, and Staff was able to explore congestion pricing.  The City had 
the most leverage with parking. 
Mr. Shikada added that the S/CAP Update could advance programs or 
experiments with incentives. 
Mayor Fine inquired regarding the progress and future of GHG emissions 
reductions if carbon offsets were not counted and whether the Council was 
able to direct Staff to explore that. 
Mr. Eggleston noted the Staff Report and presentation provided information 
about reductions and the use of offsets. 
Mr. Shikada suggested the price of natural gas could be an effective lever for 
advancing S/CAP goals. 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Kniss moved, 
seconded by Council Member Tanaka to accept the 2020-2021 Sustainability 
Work Plan, and direct Staff to return with an interim report before summer 
break and before AECOM does an impact analysis of goals and key actions. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Vice Mayor DuBois announced he became a Block Preparedness Coordinator. 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 16 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  04/13/2020 
Council Member Kniss noted the number of airplanes had decreased 
significantly during the pandemic.  Motorists were speeding, and dogs were 
everywhere.   
Council Member Kou added that few planes were in the air, but they were 
flying lower. 
Council Member Tanaka advised that many people had expressed interest in 
the roundtable, urged Staff to move quickly, and requested COVID-19 
updates include information about ways to donate. 
Mayor Fine reminded the public to comment on California High Speed Rail 
(HSR) Environmental Impact Reports (EIR) for upcoming segments.  
Complaints about noncompliance with City or County of Santa Clara 
(County) rules should be made to the Police Department's non-emergency 
number. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:05 P.M. 
