CITY OF PALO ALTO CITY COUNCIL 
FINAL MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 28 
Special Meeting 
June 15, 2020 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in Virtual 
Teleconference at 5:01 P.M. 
Participating Remotely: Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Kou, Tanaka 
Absent: 
 
Closed Session 
A. 
CONFERENCE WITH LABOR NEGOTIATORS  
City Designated Representatives: City Manager and his Designees 
Pursuant to Merit System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada, Rumi 
Portillo, Molly Stump, Monique LeConge Ziesenhenne, Nick Raisch, Kiely 
Nose, Gina Roccanova) 
Employee Organizations: Utilities Management and Professional 
Association of Palo Alto (UMPAPA); Service Employees International 
Union, (SEIU) Local 521; Service Employees International Union, (SEIU) 
Local 521, Hourly Unit; Palo Alto Police Officers Association (PAPOA); 
Palo Alto Fire Chiefs’ Association (FCA) and Employee Organization: 
International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF), Local 1319; Palo Alto 
Police Manager’s Association (PAPMA) 
Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6(a). 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
James Hindrey preferred the Council hold negotiations in open session. 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:05 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:33 P.M. 
Mayor Fine announced no reportable action.  
Agenda Changes, Additions, and Deletions 
Council Member Kou noted the agendas for June 16, 22, and 23 were packed 
and hoped some items could be postponed to July or following the break. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, recognized the number of items on upcoming 
agendas.  If the Council wished to defer any items on the current agenda, 
Staff could discuss the impacts and options. 
Mayor Fine commented regarding the pandemic, the challenging economic 
environment, systemic racism, COVID-19 cases and testing, childcare, the 
upcoming Budget hearing, Juneteenth, recent demonstrations, the Summer 
Streets program, the graduation car parade, access to Foothills Park, the 
Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (S/CAP), pension policy, development 
projects, and the November election.   
Oral Communications 
Onaiza asked the Council to move Agenda Item Number 10 forward.   
Audrey Knox concurred with Onaiza's comments. 
Winter Dellenbach inquired regarding the FBI investigation into Police 
personnel and requested Agenda Item Number 10 be moved forward. 
Brent White, International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF) Local 1319 
President, listed the Fire personnel being laid off due to Budget cuts.  Fire 
Department personnel had decreased 25 percent over the past five years while 
call volume had doubled.  The Fire Department was underfunded and 
understaffed.  Station 2 would be closed for periods of time.   
Andrew Milne noted the potential for increased ambulance response times due 
to Budget cuts and urged the Council to reconsider its cuts to the Fire 
Department. 
Lisa Chung, Senator Hill's office, recognized the Palo Alto Youth Council for its 
work on vaping.   
Lawrence Magid was disheartened by the Council reducing the number of 
Human Relations Commission (HRC) members, which decreased the diversity 
of members.  With ongoing racism and equity discussions, the HRC's work had 
increased.  He encouraged the Council to reverse its decision. 
Rebecca Eisenberg referred to the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in the 
Bostick case regarding discrimination.  Calls for defunding the Police 
Department did not include the Fire Department.   
James Hindrey concurred with comments regarding Agenda Item Number 10, 
the Fire Department's Budget, and the HRC.  He was disappointed with the 
HRC's failure to act on review of Police Department policies.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Bill Ross recommended the Council review the questions associated with the 
curfew and concurred with Mr. White's comments. 
Jonathan Erman noted performing arts programming had been affected by the 
pandemic.  Budget decisions should be reviewed in light of the pandemic.   
Minutes Approval 
1. 
Approval of Action Minutes for the May 11, 12, 13, and June 1, 2020 
Council Meetings. 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
approve the Action Minutes for the May 11, 12, 13, and June 1, 2020 Council 
Meetings. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Kou requested the Mayor consider moving Agenda Item 
Number 10 forward. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, advised that the time for changing the agenda had 
passed. 
James Hindery felt the Council was negligent in running the meeting because 
Oral Communications requested a change in the agenda.   
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 2. 
Council Member Tanaka registered no votes on Agenda Item Numbers 3 and 
4. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 2-5. 
2. 
Approval of Contract Number C20176877 With Schaaf & Wheeler 
Consulting Civil Engineers in the Amount of $789,918 for Design 
Services for the: 1) Corporation Way System Upgrades and Pump 
Station, 2) West Bayshore Road Pump Station, and 3) Trunk Line 
Improvement Projects; Capital Improvement Program Projects (SD-
21000, SD-20000, and SD-23000).  
3. 
Approval and Authorization for the City Manager or Designee to Execute 
the Following Three Utilities Public Benefits Program Contract 
Amendments: 1) Amendment Number 2 to Ecology Action of Santa Cruz 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
(C15155144A), With no Increase in Compensation and Extending the 
Term for one Additional Year; 2) Amendment Number 2 to Enovity, Inc. 
(C15155144B), With no Increase in Compensation and Extending the 
Term for one Additional Year; and 3) Amendment Number 2 to BASE 
Energy, Inc. (C15155144C), With no Increase in Compensation and 
Extending the Term for one Additional Year.  
4. 
Approval of Amendment Number 2 to Contract Number C17165394 With 
Genuine Parts Company, dba Napa Auto Parts, to Increase the Contract 
by $781,013 to an Amount Not-to-Exceed $3,777,087 and Extend the 
Term Through July 21, 2021. 
5. 
Approval of Amendment Number 3 to Contract Number C18172676 With 
Dixon Resources to Extend the Term to June 2021 With no Additional 
Costs for the Downtown Parking Study. 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 2:  6-1 Kou no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBERS 3-4:  6-1 Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED FOR AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 5:  7-0  
Council Member Kou believed funds for Agenda Item Number 2 could be better 
used elsewhere as the contract was not urgent. 
Council Member Tanaka opposed Agenda Item Numbers 3 and 4 because Staff 
had not negotiated a lower price and the contracts had increased.  The City 
should pay mileage for use of personal vehicles rather than maintaining a fleet 
of sedans.   
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported free COVID-19 testing would be 
conducted the rest of the week in City Hall.  Sidewalk services would be offered 
at Rinconada and Mitchell Park Libraries the following week.  Summer camps 
would begin in early July.  The household hazardous waste station would 
reopen on June 20.  The Council packet for the June 22 meeting had been 
revised to include a cover memorandum and supplemental report regarding 
the Independent Police Auditor's report.  The Summer Streets program for 
California Avenue was well received over the weekend.  Seven small 
businesses had been identified for the Small Business Grant program.   
Mayor Fine noted anyone could be tested at City Hall during the week.   
Council Member Kou inquired regarding a Motion to Reconsider. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that a Council Member could offer a 
Motion to Reconsider, but the movant had to be a member of the majority 
vote for the original Motion.  There was no vote for Agenda Changes, Additions 
and Deletions.  A Council Member may appeal a decision of the Mayor, and 
four votes could override the Mayor's decision. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Vice Mayor DuBois to 
move Agenda Item Number 10 to follow City Manager’s Comments.  
Council Member Kou felt the topic was too important to occur late in the 
evening.   
Vice Mayor DuBois preferred to address Agenda Item 10 early in the evening. 
Council Member Kniss commented that other members of the community 
could be planning to join the meeting at the scheduled time and would not be 
aware of the change. 
Council Member Cormack concurred with Council Member Kniss. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested other, less important topics could be 
postponed so that the Council could meet the stated agenda start times. 
Council Member Filseth suggested the meeting could proceed faster if a motion 
was offered prior to discussion of an agenda Item. 
Mayor Fine proposed proceeding with the agenda until 8:45, at which time the 
Council would proceed to Agenda Item Number 9. 
MOTION FAILED:  2-5 Cormack, Filseth, Fine, Kniss, Tanaka no 
Action Items 
6. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Resolution 9892 Entitled “Resolution of the Council 
of the City of Palo Alto Confirming the Weed Abatement Report and 
Ordering the Cost of Abatement to be a Special Assessment on the 
Respective Properties Described Therein.”  
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reported this was an opportunity for members of 
the public to be heard. 
Public Hearing opened at 7:29 P.M.  
Xander Koo found the policy to be stupid.  Other topics were more important. 
James Hindery concurred with Mr. Koo. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Public Hearing closed at 7:32 P.M. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to 
adopt the Resolution confirming the report and ordering abatement costs to 
be a special assessment on the properties specified in the report. 
Vice Mayor DuBois explained that the program required homeowners to clean 
up their yards.   
Council Member Kou noted the benefits of weed abatement in relation to 
wildfires.   
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
7. 
Resolution 9893 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo 
Alto Recommendation on the Proposed Fiscal Year (FY) 2020-2021 
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Funding Allocation; 
Recommendation That the City Manager or Designee be Authorized to 
Execute Necessary Documents for the Fiscal Year 2020-2021 CDGB 
Application; and to Submit the 2020-2021 Action Plan and the 2020- 
2025 Consolidated Plan to the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development (HUD) by the Extended Deadline of August 16, 2020.” 
Jonathan Lait, Director of Planning and Development Services, reported Staff 
recommended the Council adopt a five-year Consolidated Plan and Annual 
Action Plan, endorse the proposed funding allocations, and authorize the City 
Manager to execute and file the appropriate applications and agreements.  The 
Consolidated Plan provided the framework for identifying housing and 
community development priorities.  Annual Action Plans identified the specific 
agencies and resources that would implement programs supporting low-
income households.  Approximately $850,000 was available for disbursement 
through the program.  The City had received approximately $500,000 for rent 
relief, food assistance and COVID testing.   
Steven Lee, speaking as an individual, recommended the Council publicly 
investigate and address sexual harassment allegations against the Downtown 
Streets 
Team 
and 
supported 
the 
Human 
Relations 
Commission's 
recommendation. 
Prameela inquired about the reports the Downtown Streets Team's Director 
had indicated would be made available to the public and about the Council's 
review of the reports. 
Michele Dauber opposed the Staff recommendation to fund the Downtown 
Streets Team because of the sexual misconduct allegations.  The Council 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
should require a redacted investigation report be made available to the Council 
and the public.   
James Hindery concurred with placing conditions on the funding for the 
Downtown Streets Team and proposed the funding be reallocated to The 
Opportunity Center.   
Rebecca Eisenberg suggested the Council reject the contract with the 
Downtown Streets Team.   
Philip D., The Opportunity Center, encouraged the Council to approve funding 
for the rental assistance program.  The Opportunity Center had raised private 
funds for the program, but the number of people needing assistance was 
increasing. 
Owen Byrd, Downtown Streets Team Board Member, advised that an 
independent investigation into the allegations had concluded there were no 
gender bias in salary, promotions or opportunities and no rewards based on 
favoritism or socializing.  Claims regarding behavior at a staff holiday party 
held six years ago had been partially substantiated and addressed through 
changes in governance.  The Board had chosen not to comply with demands 
from former employees.   
Prameela rejected Mr. Byrd's comments and wanted to review the reports. 
Vice Mayor DuBois indicated Mr. Byrd had addressed the Finance Committee.  
The alleged behavior had occurred quite a while ago, and the organization had 
made changes to address the allegations.  He expressed interest in addressing 
vehicle dwellers. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack 
to:  
A. 
Adopt the funding Resolution allocating Community Development Block 
Grant (CDBG) funding as recommended in the draft 2020-2021 Action 
Plan;  
B. 
Authorize the City Manager to execute the Fiscal Year 2020-2021 CDBG 
application and Fiscal Year 2020-2021 Action Plan for CDBG funds and 
any other necessary documents concerning the application, and to 
otherwise bind the City with respect to the applications and commitment 
of funds;  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
C. 
Authorize Staff to submit the 2020-2021 Action Plan to the Department 
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) by the extended deadline of 
August 16, 2020; and  
D. 
Authorize Staff to submit the 2020-2025 Consolidated Plan to HUD by 
the extended deadline of August 16, 2020. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about the lack of current data. 
Mr. Lait believed Staff had received data more recent than 2015 for ACS.   
Council Member Cormack asked if economic development trained individuals 
for jobs or created jobs. 
Mr. Lait understand it was job training. 
Erum Maqbool, Planner, explained that the Downtown Streets Team provided 
training to homeless people and connected them to potential employers.  The 
correct year for ACS data is 2017. 
Council Member Kniss related that an investigative report regarding the 
Downtown Streets Team should be made available.  She inquired about Staff's 
access to the reports. 
Mr. Lait advised that Staff did not have the report.  Staff typically did not seek 
that type of information for this program. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reiterated that Staff had not accessed or reviewed 
the report. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, reported the City could inquire into the 
organizational effectiveness of applicants.  If the Council wished to pursue the 
report or questions, it should contact the organization.  Confidentiality or legal 
privileges may be attached to documents.   
Council Member Kniss suggested Mr. Lait discuss the issue with Mr. Byrd. 
Council Member Kou noted a difference between LifeMoves' funding shown on 
packet pages 128 and 129. 
Mr. Lait clarified that funding shown on page 128 reflected historical funding 
for LifeMoves, and the funding shown on page 129 reflected funding through 
the rent relief program.   
Council Member Kou asked if applicants had to submit reports to the City.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Mr. Lait indicated Staff followed up with agencies and conducted performance 
audits to ensure programs and services met expectations. 
Council Member Kou asked if the Human Relations Commission (HRC) 
provided oversight of the agencies. 
Mr. Lait explained that the HRC reviewed applications and made 
recommendations for funding.  Because of the pandemic, Staff utilized the 
Finance Committee rather than the HRC.   
Council Member Kou noted public concern about the allegations against the 
Downtown Streets Team. 
Vice Mayor DuBois recalled the City Attorney's statements about the 
Downtown Streets Team providing information rather than specific reports. 
Ms. Stump understood an HRC subcommittee had expressed interest in 
receiving several documents and encouraged flexibility in the language so that 
Staff could hold a dialog with the Downtown Streets Team.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “to direct Staff to ask the 
Downtown Streets Team for a report on the harassment allegations by the 
end of August.” (New Part E) 
Mr. Lait inquired whether the Council intended to tie the request for 
information to funding.  Staff had to submit their reports to the Department 
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) by August 15.   
Mayor Fine replied no. 
Council Member Kniss wanted to provide the Downtown Streets Team with an 
opportunity to end speculation.   
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Vice Mayor DuBois moved, seconded 
by Council Member Cormack to:  
A. 
Adopt the funding Resolution allocating Community Development Block 
Grant (CDBG) funding as recommended in the draft 2020-2021 Action 
Plan;  
B. 
Authorize the City Manager to execute the Fiscal Year 2020-2021 CDBG 
application and Fiscal Year 2020-2021 Action Plan for CDBG funds and 
any other necessary documents concerning the application, and to 
otherwise bind the City with respect to the applications and commitment 
of funds;  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
C. 
Authorize Staff to submit the 2020-2021 Action Plan to the Department 
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) by the extended deadline of 
August 16, 2020; and  
D. 
Authorize Staff to submit the 2020-2025 Consolidated Plan to HUD by 
the extended deadline of August 16, 2020; and 
E. 
Direct Staff to ask the Downtown Streets Team for a report on the 
harassment allegations by the end of August. 
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0 
8. 
Adoption of a Resolution 9894 Entitled, “Resolution of the Council of the 
City of Palo Alto Updating the City’s Transportation Analysis 
Methodology Under California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) to 
Comply With California Senate Bill 743; and Adoption of a Local 
Transportation Impact Analysis Policy to Evaluate Level of Service (LOS) 
and Other Local Roadway Impacts.” 
James Hindery requested a link to the Staff presentation. 
Rebecca Eisenberg suggested the Council acknowledge and consider public 
comments and perhaps change their opinions based on public comments. 
Xander Koo agreed with Ms. Eisenberg's comments and believed the Council 
had a responsibility to address the public's grievances. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested Staff comments regarding Staff's proposals in 
response to the Council's discussion during the Study Session. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, requested Staff review the recommended 
thresholds and criteria. 
Sylvia 
Star-Lack, 
Transportation 
Planning 
Manager, 
reported 
Staff 
recommended adoption of all suggested thresholds for screening except the 
threshold for local-serving retail.  Cities could identify and adopt criteria 
developed by staff as long as substantial evidence supported the criteria.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if a 0.1 threshold for the Traffic Infusion on 
Residential Environments (TIRE) level of significance represented a 2 percent 
impact.  He also requested the rationale for not utilizing the change in the 
TIRE index. 
Rafael Rius, Traffic Engineer Lead, explained that 10 or more peak-hour 
vehicle trips was the threshold for including the street in the local traffic 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
analysis (LTA).  The TIRE methodology determined the factor using a 0.1 
threshold. 
Vice Mayor DuBois understood the addition of ten car trips would be significant 
for a low-volume residential street, but it would not trigger a review. 
Mr. Rius clarified that an additional 11 car trips on a street would trigger an 
analysis.  If the traffic volume for the street was extremely low, the additional 
car trips could trigger an impact.   
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired regarding the meaning of "inconsistent with this 
Policy" as stated in the Level of Service (LOS) standard.   
Ms. Star-Lack indicated Staff attempted to avoid "significant impact" so as not 
to confuse LTA with California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) analysis.   
Vice Mayor DuBois preferred the language of "significant local impact."  He 
inquired whether the threshold of significance was 4 seconds for LOS E or F. 
Mr. Rius explained that the increase in delay was 4 seconds for average delay 
at an intersection.  The volume of conflicted movements increased by 1 
percent.  That was a stricter threshold than increasing the letter grade. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired whether Staff had analyzed a different threshold 
of significance. 
Mr. Rius advised that Staff did not analyze intersections with LOS E or F but 
did review the LOS standard.  Menlo Park utilized the LOS D standard for 
arterial streets.   
Council Member Kou asked of the LOS standard could ever improve. 
Mr. Rius indicated Staff planned intersection improvements to increase safety 
rather than to improve LOS or capacity.  LOS D was the generally accepted 
standard for intersections.   
Council Member Kou asked if the Council could set the LOS standard for the 
City. 
Mr. Rius responded yes, but Staff attempted to be consistent with regional 
practices.   
Council Member Kou inquired about litigation around vehicle miles traveled 
(VMT) regulations. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, understood litigation had been resolved.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Council Member Kou requested the City Attorney research the litigation. 
Ms. Stump reported the VMT methodology provided CEQA thresholds, and 
CEQA was an informational process and did not regulate the conduct of 
residents or visitors.   
Bob Grandy, Fehr and Peers, was aware of litigation but did not know its 
status. 
Mr. Rius related that the TIRE scale of zero to five was not based on existing 
traffic volume and was not a direct linear scale. 
Council Member Filseth understood the intent of the item was to incorporate 
State law into the Municipal Code and to develop a policy for LOS.  The Council 
could review LOS thresholds and standards at a future meeting.   
MOTION:  Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss 
to: 
A. 
Adopt a Resolution designating Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT) as the 
metric for conducting transportation analyses pursuant to the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), establishing CEQA thresholds of 
significance related to VMT, and identifying screening criteria to limit 
review for projects presumed to have a less than significant VMT impact 
based on substantial evidence; and  
B. 
Adopt a Local Transportation Impact Analysis Policy establishing 
standards for conducting local-level transportation analyses, including 
Level of Service (LOS) consistent with Comprehensive Plan Program 
T2.3.1, and addressing identified deficiencies. 
Council Member Cormack requested the timeframe for planned high-quality 
transit corridors. 
Mr. Grandy advised that the timeframe would be the timeframe for the 
individual project subject to CEQA review.   
Council Member Cormack asked if Attachment B had been provided to the 
Council previously. 
Ms. Star-Lack answered no. 
Council Member Cormack remarked that the language "major threat" seemed 
rather strong.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Mayor Fine asked if the reason for not utilizing the State threshold for local-
serving retail was retail in Palo Alto occupied a smaller footprint than State 
thresholds.   
Ms. Star-Lack wanted to analyze projects containing more than 10,000 square 
feet when the State provided an exemption from additional analysis for these 
large projects.   
Council Member Filseth inquired about a reasonable timeframe for Staff to 
return with a discussion of LOS standards. 
Mr. Shikada reported a policy discussion would not require much Staff work.   
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, “to direct Staff to return within 
6-9 months with further review of LOS Standards.” (New Part C)  
Council Member Kniss commented that the current LOS standards were 
adequate, but additional discussion was warranted.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the LOS standards could be presented to 
the Planning and Transportation Commission (PTC) prior to the Council. 
Ms. Star-Lack indicated that was in Staff's plans. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, Part B, “to rephrase the Level 
of Service Standard, “The City of Palo Alto’s Level of Service (LOS) standard 
is D, which is more conservative than the CMP LOS standard of E. If the LTA 
shows that a development project is anticipated to cause a transportation 
facility (intersection or roadway) to degrade below LOS D to LOS E or F, then 
the project will be deemed to have significant local impact.” (New Part B.i) 
Mayor Fine asked if the language change would affect other provisions of the 
analysis. 
Ms. Star-Lack replied no. 
Mayor Fine inquired about a scenario in which the language may be confused 
with CEQA. 
Mr. Rius explained that Staff conducted LTA and the CEQA analysis in one 
traffic report for large projects.   
Mr. Shikada asked if there was an error in the second paragraph. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Ms. Star-Lack responded no. 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Filseth moved, 
seconded by Council Member Kniss to: 
A. 
Adopt a Resolution designating Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT) as the 
metric for conducting transportation analyses pursuant to the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), establishing CEQA thresholds of 
significance related to VMT, and identifying screening criteria to limit 
review for projects presumed to have a less than significant VMT impact 
based on substantial evidence;  
B. 
Adopt a Local Transportation Impact Analysis Policy establishing 
standards for conducting local-level transportation analyses, including 
Level of Service (LOS) consistent with Comprehensive Plan Program 
T2.3.1, and addressing identified deficiencies;  
i. 
Rephrase the Level of Service Standard, “The City of Palo Alto’s 
Level of Service (LOS) standard is D, which is more conservative 
than the CMP LOS standard of E. If the LTA shows that a 
development project is anticipated to cause a transportation 
facility (intersection or roadway) to degrade below LOS D to LOS 
E or F, then the project will be deemed to have significant local 
impact.”; and 
C. 
Direct Staff to return within 6-9 months with further review of LOS 
Standards.  
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-1 Kou no 
Council took a break at 9:06 P.M. and returned at 9:12 P.M. 
9. 
Approval of two Lease Agreements Between Palo Alto Unified School 
District and the City of Palo Alto for: 1) Cubberley for 54 months, Not-
to-Exceed Amount of $2,733,280 per year, and 2) Extended Day Care. 
Kristen O’Kane, Director of Community Services Department, reported the 
City leased 27 acres of the Cubberley campus from the Palo Alto Unified School 
District (PAUSD) for $5.4 million annually.  The City paid $700,000 annually 
for extended daycare at elementary schools.  In October 2019, the Council 
directed Staff to negotiate a lease with PAUSD for an additional five years.  
The proposed lease would grant the City use of both gyms, spaces G5 and G8 
adjacent to gyms, the Pavilion, the theater, the modular structure occupied 
by the Friends of the Palo Alto Library, Building S, the auditorium temporarily 
housing the Junior Museum and Zoo (JMZ), the maintenance shop, fields, and 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
the track.  The lease term was July 1, 2020 to December 31, 2024.  The City's 
annual lease payment was $2.5 million, $13,790 for the auditorium, and 
$5,650 for Building S.  The City would maintain and repair the property with 
PAUSD reimbursing the City for its share of the maintenance.  Avenidas, 
Imagination School, and the Palo Alto Humane Society would relocate to the 
City's portion of Cubberley.  Children's Preschool, Friends of the Palo Alto 
Library, HeartFit for Life, and Minority TV would remain in their spaces.  Silicon 
Valley Karate was pursuing a lease with PAUSD.  Genius Kids had terminated 
its lease.  Community for Christ Church had not found a new location.  PAUSD 
had offered rental spaces to some Cubberley renters.  Staff was working with 
other renters to find new spaces.  The lease term for extended childcare sites 
at 12 elementary schools was July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2022 with an annual 
rent payment of $707,676.   
Diane Reklis remarked that the proposed leases were disappointing and hoped 
the City and PAUSD could commit to working together. 
Penny Ellson expressed disappointment with the City and PAUSD for allowing 
the underuse of Cubberley and for failing to maintain Cubberley.  It would be 
more efficient for one agency to manage the facility.   
Rebecca Eisenberg chastised the Council for failing to tax businesses and the 
City's wealthiest citizens to pay for social and community services.  The City 
should pay PAUSD more so that vulnerable citizens did not have to pay.   
James Hindery concurred with prior comments.  One group should manage 
the property.   
Jeremy Erman believed the process had contained errors.  The lease would 
separate the theater from dressing rooms.   
Ken Horowitz indicated the lease was a bad deal for the City.  Cubberley 
needed repairs, and PAUSD was not interested in repairing it.  The City should 
look for permanent sites for Cubberley tenants and renters.   
Pat Burt commented that Staff presented a fundamental policy change in the 
guise of a budgetary decision.  The month-to-month lease should continue 
while stakeholder engagement occurred.   
Jonathan Erman remarked that splitting the theater was not logical.  The Staff 
Report did not include information about tenant and renter payments to the 
City.   
Council Member Cormack would not support a lease with the proposed lease 
term and inquired about options for a two-year lease term. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, advised that 54 months was consistent with the 
prior lease term.  PAUSD would probably not be enthusiastic about a shorter 
lease term.   
Council Member Cormack inquired about the previous lease requirements for 
milestones, an ad hoc committee, and an existing conditions survey. 
Mr. Shikada explained that the proposed lease terms were developed in 
response to the pandemic.  A number of variables were discussed during 
negotiations.  PAUSD and the City were suffering Budget cuts, and PAUSD 
needed to utilize space on the property. 
Council Member Cormack asked Staff to address public comments about the 
theater. 
Ms. O’Kane indicated rooms adjacent to the theater were used for dressing 
rooms and were suitable for rental spaces.  Users of the theater could rent the 
rooms from PAUSD.   
Council Member Cormack asked about inspections to document the current 
condition and the future condition of the facility. 
Sonny Tong, Real Estate Manager, related that the landlord typically viewed 
the property at the beginning and end of the lease to ensure the condition had 
not changed.  The City would be responsible for basic maintenance of the 
facility. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if other lease terms had changed. 
Mr. Shikada explained that the proposed lease was substantially different from 
the prior lease such that a redline version was not possible.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the recent one and five-year leases with PAUSD 
had been extensions of the original 1990 lease. 
Ms. O’Kane replied yes. 
Vice Mayor DuBois inquired whether PAUSD would be willing to lease the entire 
35 acres for less money. 
Mr. Shikada stated the lease terms were negotiated in response to the City's 
fiscal distress and the need to provide community access to specific facilities. 
Vice Mayor DuBois requested the names of tenants and renters that would be 
displaced. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Ms. O’Kane answered Community for Christ Church and the Palo Alto Humane 
Society.  Staff continued to work with renters.  One tenant had provided a 
time when another entity could utilize its space.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked which entity would have possession of building Q. 
Ms. O’Kane replied the City.   
Council Member Kniss noted a PAUSD representative was not present and 
presumed the proposed lease was a shared agreement. 
Mr. Shikada described the proposed lease as a way to make the best of a bad 
situation. 
Council Member Kniss remarked that the buildings had not been improved 
since 1978, but PAUSD did not have any plans for the property.  The City 
would continue its annual $2 million payment to the Cubberley Infrastructure 
Fund.   
Council Member Kou felt the proposed lease represented a short-term solution 
and the loss of community space.  She inquired whether PAUSD had offered 
to reduce the lease payment more. 
Mr. Shikada explained that Staff offered the amount the City could afford for 
the space over which the City did not have control.  That amount was the 
beginning of the negotiations.  Staff wanted to maintain access to facilities 
with high community use.   
Council Member Tanaka commented that reducing the payment to PAUSD was 
not a solution to the City's fiscal issues.  He did not like the proposed lease 
because of its impact on PAUSD.   
Council Member Filseth appreciated Staff finding new locations for tenants. 
Mayor Fine inquired whether the Board of Education (Board) had approved the 
leases. 
Ms. O’Kane responded yes. 
Mayor Fine asked if the City could negotiate an extension of the lease in the 
future. 
Mr. Shikada answered yes. 
Mayor Fine requested the provisions for early termination of the lease. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Mr. Shikada advised that written notice of termination had to be provided 120 
days prior to the termination date. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kniss moved, seconded by Council Member Kou 
to authorize the City Manager to execute the Lease Agreements between Palo 
Alto Unified School District (PAUSD) and the City of Palo Alto (City) for 
Cubberley for 54 months and Extended Day Care premises for 24 months, 
Not-to-Exceed amount of $707,676 per year. 
Council Member Kniss suggested the proposed lease represented a cost-
sharing agreement.  The leases were appropriate for the current 
circumstances. 
Council Member Kou suggested the City could find additional funding to retain 
use of the entire Cubberley campus, but the proposed lease accommodated 
many tenants. 
Vice Mayor DuBois wanted to return to exploring creative solutions for the site 
that would be good for the community.  The proposed lease was reasonable 
for a short-term solution.  He preferred a lease term of 24 months. 
Council Member Kniss proposed a lease term of three years or 30 months so 
that tenants could have time to settle. 
Ms. O'Kane suggested 24 months was too short.  Either party could terminate 
the lease with a 120-day notice.   
Council Member Kou requested the number of tenants that had leases for 54 
months. 
Ms. O'Kane reported all tenants were using month-to-month leases.  Many 
tenants probably preferred longer-term leases for stability.   
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the typical tenant lease had a one-year term. 
Mr. Tong indicated most lease terms coincided with the City/PAUSD lease.  
Most tenants had been onsite for years. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change the Motion to state “… for Cubberley for 
30 months … .” 
Mr. Shikada requested the Council think about reasons PAUSD should agree 
to a shorter lease term. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois explained that a shorter lease term could be renegotiated 
sooner if the COVID situation resolved.  The City may want to restructure the 
lease for construction on the City's portion of the property when the economic 
outlook improved.   
Todd Collins, PAUSD Board of Trustees President, stated PAUSD did not seek 
a modification of the lease terms.  The proposed lease was the only one 
presented to the Board, and the Board had reluctantly approved the lease.  
PAUSD would likely be open to other lease terms.   
Council Member Cormack remarked that the City's constituents were not the 
same as the Board's constituents.  The City's budget deficit was $39 million 
compared to PAUSD's deficit of $3 million.  Cubberley should be part of the 
Infrastructure Plan.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by 
Council Member XX to direct Staff to have a more collaborative negotiation 
with the Palo Alto Unified School District (PAUSD). 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED DUE TO THE LACK OF A SECOND  
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Council Member Kniss moved, 
seconded by Council Member Kou to authorize the City Manager to execute 
the Lease Agreements between Palo Alto Unified School District (PAUSD) and 
the City of Palo Alto (City) for Cubberley for 30 months, Not-to-Exceed amount 
of $2,733,280 per Year and Extended Day Care premises for 24 months, Not-
to-Exceed amount of $707,676 per year.  
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka no 
10. 
Review and Provide Initial Input on Options for a Framework and 
Workplan to Address Systemic Racism. 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, reviewed the Council's June 8 motion.  The 
proposed framework included elements to garner input from the Council and 
to guide next steps.  Some items could be developed quickly, while other items 
would require an examination of existing conditions, community engagement, 
goal setting, and implementation.  Transparency and accountability were 
critical to the process.  The Council would regularly review progress in specific 
areas.  The proposed framework included immediate review of current Police 
policies 
and 
use 
of 
force 
practices; 
community 
engagement 
and 
communications; organizational policies and decision-making; and community 
services and programs. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Xander Koo supported defunding the Police Department.  Police Officers were 
responsible for too many parts of public safety infrastructure when their only 
tools were weapons.  Defunding would include establishing new roles for Police 
Officers.   
Alicia Mies remarked that the proposed framework was incredibly broad, 
vague, and potentially useless.  The element for accountability did not offer 
answers for the community's questions.  The Council should seriously consider 
defunding the Police Department and allocating the funds to the Community 
Services Department. 
Onaiza suggested the Police Department's Budget match public opinion.  All 
police misconduct should be subject to independent audit, and all body camera 
footage should be released to the public.  Police Officers with disciplinary and 
misconduct records should be fired.  
James Hindery indicated 8 Can't Wait should not be discussed but 
implemented.   
Bill Ross believed the Council should take immediate action on use of force 
and request labor groups waive meet-and-confer requirements for this issue.   
Allen Rankin recommended the Council appoint independent medical 
professionals and civil rights activists to police review boards.   
Kevin did not agree with utilizing the Police Chief's advisory group.  An 
advisory group should be independent of the City, the Council, and the Police 
Department.  Police and prison abolition were the long-term goal. 
Robert Vetter remarked that Palo Alto was built on systemic racism.  The 
Council had to do better. 
Hannah Waleh agreed with prior comments.  An oppressive system could not 
be reformed.  The Police Department should be replaced with currently 
unidentified community safety programs.   
Lauren Cory, American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), wanted to participate in 
the racism dialog.  She inquired about bias training for Police Officers, 
compliance with Senate Bill (SB) 1421, and incorporation of community-based 
organizations for mental health and domestic scenarios.   
Winter Dellenbach stated accountability must be the primary goal.  Laws 
prohibiting the disclosure of personnel records should be eliminated.  An 
advisory body must be independent and should be selected and answerable 
to the City Council.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Cedric de La Beaujardiere recommended the City adopt the 8 Can't Wait 
policies.  Police Officers should be guardians and not warriors. 
Laura Sieh noted the 2019 Council action to transfer personnel conflicts from 
the independent auditor to the Human Resources (HR) Department, which 
lessened transparency.  Police reforms were being decided by the Council in 
consultation with the Police Department and labor union.   
Warren Wagner stated the proposed framework was a local solution to a 
systemic problem.  Certain changes could create safety and remove the 
capacity for police violence.  The framework should remove tools of oppression 
and reduce the scope of policing. 
Rev. Kaloma Smith, Human Relations Commission (HRC) Chair, advised that 
the HRC was willing and prepared to assist the Council and lead the discussion.   
Hamilton Hitchings suggested the City adopt Supervisor Simitian's police 
reform proposal for the Santa Clara County Sheriff's Office.  8 Can't Wait was 
a starting point only. 
Mary Jane Marcus felt the Council was willing to implement incremental 
changes, but protestors wanted wholesale changes.  The new Public Safety 
Building (PSB) could be a community space.   
Dhara Yu referred to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) investigation 
into the Police Department and hoped the Police Department and Council were 
acting with urgency. 
Council took a break at 11:24 P.M. and returned at 11:32 P.M. 
Mayor Fine requested the City Manager reiterate the direction Staff sought 
from the Council. 
Mr. Shikada listed method or form of engagement, use of an advisory group, 
use of Boards and Commissions, and content of the proposed framework. 
Council Member Kniss noted Sunnyvale utilized a Public Safety Division to 
provide police, fire, and emergency services, and personnel could fulfill any of 
the three roles.  Perhaps it was time to dramatically reform the Police 
Department. 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if funding for School Resource Officers (SRO) had 
been eliminated from the Budget. 
Mr. Shikada responded yes. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Vice Mayor DuBois asked if the Independent Police Auditor (IPA) would report 
on the Alvarez matter. 
Mr. Shikada answered yes.   
Robert Jonsen, Police Chief, advised that the administrative investigation was 
pending a decision in the criminal investigation.  A decision had been rendered 
in the criminal investigation, and the administrative investigation would be 
finalized.  The matter would be sent to the IPA probably by the end of the 
year.  The January 2021 report would be the earliest date for a report from 
the IPA.   
Vice Mayor DuBois proposed a short-term response be ready for Council 
consideration following the break.  The Council may want to discuss a long-
term response as a Study Session.   
Council Member Cormack believed the Council should do the work.  She 
inquired regarding data pertaining to racial profiling, traffic stops and other 
incidents. 
Mr. Shikada related that some data was no longer collected, and other data 
could be compiled. 
Council Member Cormack agreed with suggestions to work with partners.  She 
inquired about a process to accept the IPA's recommendations. 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, indicated the Council's practice was to receive the 
IPA's report as an information item.   
Mr. Jonsen reported the Police Department accepted and incorporated all IPA 
recommendations.  Policies and protocols had been adapted based on the 
recommendations.   
Council Member Cormack requested the consequences for violation of the 
policies outlined in Attachment C. 
Mr. Jonsen reported a use of force incident was investigated in depth.  If the 
investigation determined a policy violation had occurred, an administrative 
investigation was opened.  Disciplinary actions would be imposed based on 
recommendations. 
Council Member Tanaka was intrigued by Sunnyvale's rotation of public safety 
roles.  A more flexible workforce could aid budgetary constraints.  He was 
interested in a Study Session on the topic.  He questioned whether public 
safety should report to the Council rather than the City Manager.  Access to 
data should be open.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Council Member Filseth felt there was an extremely long delay between an 
incident and the IPA's report and asked if it was typical. 
Mr. Jonsen advised that an internal investigation was typically provided to the 
IPA within 30 days of the incident.  The Alvarez incident was reported a year 
after it occurred and was subject to a criminal investigation and a use of force 
investigation.  Typically, the Council should have the IPA's report within 12 
months of an incident.   
Council Member Filseth asked if a year delay was too long. 
Mr. Jonsen remarked that the IPA had the capacity to complete reports timely.  
The goal was to have the IPA report in the same year an incident occurred. 
Council Member Filseth did not believe incidents such as the one involving 
George Floyd could happen in Palo Alto, but the City had to ensure those 
incidents did not occur.  The 8 Can't Wait policies may be the way to ensure 
that.  The Council had to look at best practices for accountability, 
transparency, and oversight. 
Council Member Kou inquired about ways to alter the culture of the Police 
Department. 
Mr. Jonsen commented that time was needed to change culture.  He set 
expectations when he joined the Police Department, and new hires began the 
transformation.   
Council Member Kou inquired about ways for Police Officers to be part of the 
community.   
Mr. Jonsen explained that officers interacted with the community in non-law 
enforcement capacities during National Night Out, Community Academy, or 
parent projects.  With Budget constraints, fewer officers would be available 
for community interaction.   
Council Member Kou asked if another model for community interaction was 
foot patrols. 
Mr. Jonsen answered yes.  Police Officers were assigned to foot and bicycle 
patrols.   
Council Member Kou inquired about the labor contracts. 
Mr. Shikada reported the City and the unions were the parties to labor 
contracts, which provide processes for compensation, grievances, and 
discipline. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Mayor Fine asked about Palo Alto's response to an incident similar to the 
George Floyd incident. 
Mr. Shikada expected Staff would focus on facts and circumstances.   
Mayor Fine inquired about the role of a Community Service Officer (CSO) 
compared to the role of a Police Officer. 
Mr. Jonsen advised that the CSO handled reports, non-injury traffic collisions, 
and special events. 
Mr. Shikada suggested the Council consider scenarios to which non-armed 
personnel could respond.  In the past, medical clinicians had responded with 
officers to specific situations. 
Mayor Fine requested the rationale for redacting portions of the policy manual. 
Mr. Jonsen indicated policies that had been redacted had tactical components.   
Mayor Fine asked if race data was collected for traffic stops. 
Mr. Jonsen replied no.  In the past, one employee was responsible for 
collecting that data.  Data collection ceased when the position was eliminated.  
The Police Department would have to begin collecting the data by April 2023. 
Mayor Fine asked if the Police Department could obtain no-knock warrants. 
Mr. Jonsen advised that the Police Department rarely obtained that type of 
warrant. 
Mayor Fine asked if the Police Department utilized less-than-lethal munitions. 
Mr. Jonsen responded yes.   
Council Member Filseth asked if CSOs comprised about 10 percent of the patrol 
force. 
Mr. Jonsen explained that the Department had two CSOs. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the Police Department had any military-grade 
equipment. 
Mr. Jonsen answered high-caliber rifles only. 
Council Member Kou requested the circumstances for use of the Swat Team. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Mr. Jonsen related that the Swat Team trained for high-risk situations such as 
an active shooter.   
Council Member Kou inquired about protection for dignitaries. 
Mr. Jonsen indicated a dignitary's security team may request assistance from 
the Police Department. 
Council Member Kou inquired regarding laws that allowed the Council to 
receive reports of disciplinary actions. 
Mr. Jonsen reported new laws required the Police Department to release 
information specific to certain incidents.   
Council Member Kou inquired about the likelihood of officers intervening in 
inappropriate actions. 
Mr. Jonsen explained that the policy manual stated a duty to intervene.   
Council Member Kou inquired about the FBI investigation. 
Ms. Stump could not comment. 
Council Member Kou inquired about the possibility of Firefighters and EMTs 
responding to domestic violence calls. 
Mr. Jonsen remarked that domestic violence calls historically were the most 
dangerous calls.   
Council Member Kou asked if a psychiatrist or psychologist could respond to a 
situation such as the one on Tennessee the prior year. 
Mr. Jonsen advised that a psychologist was on scene for the incident on 
Tennessee.  However, civilians would not respond to calls of an armed 
individual. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to create a stretch goal for best practices.  
She inquired if there was any data regarding the duty to intervene. 
Mr. Jonsen did not have that information, and collecting the data would be 
quite difficult. 
Council Member Cormack proposed the Council look at separating the many 
roles in which Police Officers serve. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
MOTION:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by Council Member Kniss to provide 
direction to Staff on a proposed initial framework and workplan to address 
police use of force and citywide issues related to race and equity to include 
the following: 
A. 
Direct the Human Relations Commission to lead the 8 Can’t Wait 
Initiative and to produce a report on the black community's history in 
Palo Alto; 
B. 
Expand community engagement to include private and public forums; 
C. 
Start Council Ad-Hoc Committees with monthly reports on: police hiring, 
data analysis, practices and policies, transparency, and accountability; 
D. 
Start a community-effort to paint “Black Lives Matter” or a similar 
message near City Hall; 
E. 
Direct the Public Art Commission to explore public art honoring 
diversity; and 
F. 
Direct Staff to evaluate which current police functions may be served by 
other public safety models. 
Mayor Fine noted short-term and long-term topics for the Council.  Some 
Police functions could be served by other public safety models.   
Council Member Kniss remarked that the HRC was ready to work on the            
8 Can't Wait policies.  Each of the subparts would require work and time.   
Mr. Shikada believed work on the issues would displace other priorities.  The 
role of the ad hoc committees and staff would have to be determined. 
Council Member Kou preferred a commission other than the HRC take on the 
8 Can't Wait policies.  The Black Lives Matter message should be painted soon. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, Part A, “and brown.” 
Council Member Cormack inquired about timeframes for each of the efforts. 
Mayor Fine proposed Subparts A, B and D as short-term projects, Subpart C 
as medium-term, and Subparts E and F as long-term. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to add to the Motion, Part A, “within 90 days” and 
to the Motion, Part B, “within 30 days”. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
Mr. Shikada needed additional details to provide a timeframe for Subpart D. 
Vice Mayor DuBois preferred a 60-day timeframe for Subpart A and appointing 
additional members to the HRC for greater diversity. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to change the Motion, Part A from 90 days to 60 
days. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed combining Subparts D and E. 
Mayor Fine preferred to delegate the artwork to the community.   
Mr. Shikada proposed a Council ad hoc committee work on the artwork. 
Council Member Kniss commented that giving the Public Art Commission 
artistic control would ensure artwork met community expectations. 
INCORPORATED INTO THE MOTION WITH THE CONSENT OF THE 
MAKER AND SECONDER to combine Parts D and E in the Motion. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested the Council focus on Subparts A and E as 
a starting point.  He questioned whether the words "black" and "brown" 
included the Asian community.   
Council Member Kou requested clarification of Subpart D. 
Mayor Fine suggested the Public Art Commission, Staff, and the community 
prepare a proposal within the next two weeks. 
Council Member Kou felt the artwork should focus on the letters and message.  
A Council ad hoc committee should work on the technical aspects of 8 Can't 
Wait. 
Mayor Fine suggested the Council Liaison to the HRC and alternate form the 
ad hoc committee. 
Mr. Shikada looked forward to engaging Police Officers and the union in the 
effort. 
Council Member Filseth remarked that Subpart C could involve a great deal of 
work and outside expertise. 
Vice Mayor DuBois noted there was no alternate Council Liaison for the HRC. 
Mayor Fine appointed Council Member Kou to the ad hoc committee. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 28 of 28 
City Council Meeting 
Final Minutes:  06/15/2020 
MOTION AS AMENDED RESTATED:  Mayor Fine moved, seconded by 
Council Member Kniss to provide direction to Staff on a proposed initial 
framework and workplan to address police use of force and citywide issues 
related to race and equity to include the following: 
A. 
Direct the Human Relations Commission to lead the “8 Can’t Wait” 
campaign and to produce a report on the black and brown history and 
current community in Palo Alto, within 60 days; 
B. 
Expand community engagement to include private and public forums, 
within 30 days; 
C. 
Start Council Ad-Hoc Committees with monthly reports on: police hiring, 
data analysis, practices and policies, transparency, and accountability; 
D. 
Direct the Public Art Commission to explore public art honoring diversity, 
and work with our community to paint “Black Lives Matter” or a similar 
message near City Hall, as soon as possible; and 
E. 
Direct Staff to evaluate which current police functions may be served by 
other public safety models.  
MOTION AS AMENDED PASSED:  7-0  
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Kou requested an update regarding a permanent noise 
monitoring station and the amount of membership fees the City paid to the 
Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC), the Association of Bay Area 
Governments (ABAG), and the League of California Cities. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 1:11 A.M. 
