CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 17 
 Regular Meeting 
 
May 13, 2024 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual 
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker 
Present Remotely:  
Absent: 
 
Call to Order 
Mayor Stone called the session to order. The clerk called roll with all present. 
Special Orders of the Day 
1. 
Proclamation Recognizing Public Employees and City Service Accomplishments and 
Acknowledging National Public Service Recognition Week: May 5-11, 2024 
NO ACTION 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims read a proclamation recognizing public employees and city 
service accomplishments.  
Council Member Kou read a proclamation honoring Sandra Blanch for 30 years of service to the 
City of Palo Alto. 
City Manager Shikada read names of employees who have hit 20, 25, 30 and 35-year milestones 
of service with the City and a photo was taken.  
 
2. 
Proclamation Recognizing National Police Week - May 12-18, 2024 and National Peace 
Officers' Memorial Day May 15, 2024 
NO ACTION 
Mayor Stone read a proclamation recognizing National Police Week and National Peace 
Officers’ Memorial Day.  
Police Chief Andrew Binder accepted the proclamation and announced a memorial service 
honoring three Palo Alto officers who gave their lives in the line of duty.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
City Manager Shikada observed no changes to the agenda but called attention to Item Number 
12 being included on the agenda for the following week and did not require completion of 
discussion that evening. 
 
Public Comment 
Mayor Stone provided ground rules for public comment.  
1. 
Rick F., speaking on behalf of (6): Miriam, Henriette C., Deborah G., Erik G., Rotem, 
described instances and provided video of antisemitism on college campuses. He 
thought everyone should keep their eyes open to prevent such targeting from 
happening.  
2. 
Adele, speaking on behalf of (6): Avner, Estee, Gadi P., Allyson R., Itai D., also spoke 
about and provided a slide presentation representing antisemitism practices happening 
on college campuses.  
3. 
Lori M., speaking on behalf of (6): Martin W., Ronit B., Eric T., Jennifer F., Scott S., 
commented about an offensive sign displayed across the street from PALY High at Town 
and Country the previous week and about the signs and chanting heard and seen in 
marches through the streets of Downtown Palo Alto. She urged that everyone use 
freedom of speech to promote love and unity and find a way to share messages in a way 
that supports safety and belonging for all Palo Altoans.  
4. 
Uzma M., speaking on behalf of (6): Yazan, Talha, Tuba, Lubna, Nadir, provided slides 
discussing racism and violence occurring in college campus protests. She advised that 
Palo Alto needs to acknowledge there is a systematic racist problem.    
5. 
Christina G., speaking on behalf of (6): Taha A., Humza S., Yasa B., Mona F., Hadi S., 
spoke about herself and her two children being violently harassed and threatened since 
becoming allies to the Palestinian and Arab communities. She provided videos of a child 
being rescued from a wreckage and of harassment.    
6. 
Emily G., 7-year-old, described being harassed when protesting the Israel-Gaza war.  
7. 
Aidan G., 10-year-old, described being harassed when Biden visited.  
8. 
Jonathan wanted to know why there has never been a resolution proposed to the City 
Council in regards to actions taken by Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries against 
other Arabs.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
9. 
Lisa M. announced a free resource fair being held on Wednesday, May 22 from 10 am to 
12 pm at the Opportunity Service Center open to anyone in the community.  
10. 
Noel S. thought money should be cut off for weapons to Israel. He believed Israel to be a 
racist, apartheid state.  
11. 
Sarit S. advised that the UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reduced the 
reported number of women and children casualties in Gaza by 50 percent. She opined 
Israel did not start the war; Hamas did, putting Palestinians in harm’s way.  
12. 
Elaine E. remarked that local resolutions can raise awareness about the war and help 
educate communities about what is happening in Palestine and Israel. She stated 
continued silence implies Palo Alto’s support for condoning genocide.  
13. 
Talya S., speaking on behalf of (6): Antonia M., Anika D., Evan T., Om R., Aiden M., spoke 
as a representative of the Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition with a reminder that it is 
critical that the City remains committed to sustainability and climate goals. She provided 
a slide presentation about local schools’ Earth Week events.   
14. 
Avroh S., speaking on behalf of (7): Julia Z., Bella F., Christopher P., Deborahlise, Phoebe 
M-J., and Sara S., gave a slide presentation discussing concerns and issues related to 
achieving SCAP goals and ways to mitigate those. They requested setting a concrete 
timeline for One Margin implementation, instituting a strict efficiency building code 
before the Council goes on hiatus and before gas appliances are installed in new 
construction across the City and setting an end-of-life mandate for furnaces and water 
heaters by 2026. They advocated the approval of more projects to make the City more 
bikeable and urged to have E-bikes incentivized. Lastly, they asked for a stronger public 
awareness campaign for heat-pump water heaters.  
15. 
Lea G. spoke out about against anti-Palestinian attacks on community members and to 
demand greater protection for Palestinian solidarity protesters.  
16. 
Mike G. commented that while his family attended a demonstration in favor of a 
ceasefire, his Jewish-American children were verbally attacked and threatened by Palo 
Alto residents and passersby. The PAPD responded that nothing could be done as no 
crime was committed. He was concerned that the lack of a firm stance was emboldening 
this kind of behavior and creating an unsafe environment for Palo Alto residents and 
urged Council to adopt a stronger stance on the ceasefire topic.  
17. 
Bill R. wanted to compliment the Utility Department employees who completed the 
paving on Amherst Street. He remarked they complied with all City regulations and were 
extremely informative. He requested his comments be entered into the personnel file 
for those utility workers involved. He had attempted to get a contract number from the 
City Manager’s office without a response. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
18. 
Zaine described herself, her friend and their children being called a terrorist when 
attending a protest by a man with an Israeli flag. 
19. 
Carol G. (Zoom), producer of Third Thursday California Avenue, announced events 
planned for their first anniversary.  
20. 
Aram J. (Zoom) regarded the Unity Statement to be a genuflect to the Zionist 
community. He declared that no justice in Gaza meant no peace in Palo Alto.  
21. 
Azadeh M. (Zoom) remarked that innocent humans in Palestine were being tortured and 
killed because of the geographics of where they live. She considered the City’s 
continued silence to be an active approval of genocide.   
22. 
Nick G. (Zoom) provided his views against Jewish people.  
 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Kou queried what is planned for the expanded outreach efforts to keep the 
community informed about the various technical studies and project updates including the 
outreach initiative to gather feedback and comments from the resident community, especially 
those that will be greatly affected and impacted by the grade separation project. She asked that 
Staff make sure they visit the sites of partial and full takings of property and measure and place 
markers indicating how much of the people’s properties will be taken.   
Mayor Stone announced that in consultation with Vice Mayor Lauing $5000 would be allocated 
from the Council Contingency to the Chamber of Commerce to help fund Third Thursday as 
requested by the event organizer.  
 
Study Session 
3. 
FY 2025 Proposed Operating and Capital Budget - Finance Committee Update and 
Council Budget Discussion 
NO ACTION 
Chief Financial Officer Lauren Lai gave a slide presentation discussing the FY 2025 proposed 
operating and capital budgets, budget conversations and calendar, proposed budget overview, 
citywide budget strategies, a summary of the Finance Committee workshops, “Parking Lot” of 
general fund budget, “Parking Lot” – revenue and expenses, general fund budget balancing 
with “Parking Lot” items, announcement of upcoming meetings, and Council discussion.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
Council Member Burt characterized this as a modestly conservative budget. He noted that 
Measures K and L were not fully included in the budget. He explained they were eyeballing the 
BSR at 18.5 percent but when they were done it was at 18.3 and they needed Council feedback 
from that. He stated there are several items that they do not yet have staff estimates on the 
cost. He clarified that the Roth building is proposed to be a split on the additional cost that 
came about from escalating construction cost that occurred because of construction delays. It is 
for the hardshell of the building, not to build it out as a museum. They had two different items 
related to Fire Department Emergency Response which they were hoping to be able to come up 
with creative solutions on how to restore additional fire services including the $60,000 for 
additional staff versus overtime. He stated the Special Events Fund was complimentary to the 
HSRAP fund established to fund certain important collaborations that did not fit in HSRAP 
funding. The expansion of the teen library services came about from a recognition of how 
complimentary the community services efforts on youth wellbeing and other community 
services are with library services. He recalled the discussion of the increasing recognition of the 
public health and environmental issues associated with synthetic turf so Staff is working on 
doing comparisons of both capital and operating costs of a changeover. There is timing issue 
with the fields. There was a struggle with the Palo Alto Link Program as it has been relying on a 
grant but is not highly sustainable. They wanted Council’s sentiment on how to scope thee 
program to serve people who actually need the service as opposed to the City providing a 
highly subsidized Uber service for people who choose to use it by discretion.   
Vice Mayor Lauing commented when a new revenue number is entered, that is a projection but 
an expense number is an expense. There are certain services or products that still have to be 
tweaked.  
Council Member Kou questioned if the $946,000 for JMZ’s new staff, contracts, and new 
ticketing system adds would be ongoing in 2026 only or if it would continue and if there has 
been discussion on whether there is a plan in order looking at the Friends of the JMZ taking 
over the operations. She asked how it would be taken out of the Parking Lot. Regarding 
amending the gas transfer to the general fund, if 18 percent was voted by voters, how does the 
Council change it? She was concerned about reducing the BSR below 18.5 but assumed one of 
the first priorities would be to make it whole again. She wanted to know why the City is paying 
for the Cubberley Field restrooms. She thought it was a consideration for the Council or Staff to 
think about where bathrooms are most needed at this time. She recalled having a consultant to 
find and manage grants and wanted to know the cost difference in that and the person being 
hired for grant management. She remarked that they needed to be thinking of future years and 
how to make sure the safety departments would be ready for population growth and would 
warrant a discussion moving forward. She thought they needed to look at the nonprofits, the 
audit that was done and to see whether their services are still warranted and actually serve the 
people in Palo Alto. She wanted to see if Avenidas is benefitting all seniors equitably. She 
supported the turf replacement study but wanted more information about it.  
Ms. Lai responded that it would be ongoing. She advised that the surpluses at the end of each 
year could be a priority area of funding the BSR back up. The rebalancing would be a part of the 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
discussion that night and described a couple of options. Ms. Lai explained that the consultant is 
on the front end to help identify applicable grants and assist in the ability to be successful in a 
competitive process. The grant analyst would focus on the compliance component.  
Council Member Burt added there was not a discussion of Friends. It was their understanding 
that the Friends was not looking at a long-term public-private partnership. They addressed that 
they have fundraising they are doing focused on inclusion, special programs and special 
projects. He explained that being a study session, the Council would not be voting on this 
tonight, but the Committee and Staff would be listening to the feedback from the Council to 
give guidance on the next effort. Regarding the change of amending gas transfer to general 
fund, the Council has elected to do a phased implementation of up to the 18 percent because 
last year they had unusual spikes in the gas cost and Council decided to mitigate those costs by 
not doing the authorized transfer. They already have significant utility increases so the struggle 
was balancing the general fund projects with mitigating the impacts of rate increases. He 
advised that the turf replacement study included determining the capital cost of change and 
operating cost going forward and the consideration of cost-effectiveness along with health and 
environmental impacts.  
City Manager Shikada explained that the Cubberley restroom siting was a result of a community 
process that identified the best location and it happened that they are located on the fields. 
They do have a continuing consultant contract for finding grants and assisting with completing 
applications but the person being hired for grant management would ensure they were able to 
meet all grant requirements once they are awarded. Regarding the turf replacement study, he 
said the Finance Committee identified a series of criteria they suggested be used in the 
evaluation so there would be a number of dimensions to the work coming back.  
Paul Harper, Budget Manager, described that the turf replacement study would be to 
determine whether proceeding with turf replacement is the most cost-effective and viable 
solution for the City or whether they should be replacing it with grass going forward.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked for information about the BSR. She wondered what they 
were contemplating not funding in the capital budget in order to reduce it by the projected 
amount. She asked for clarification on the Uncertainty Reserve because she could not make 
sense of the $4.7 million number. She wanted a rationale for the Ability Path matching gift 
being asked of the City. She wanted to know what percentage of the History Museum shell 
building is being funded by the City versus their community partners. She wanted a sense of 
what is happening under the library for teen services. She supported finding $25,000 for the 
Fire Explorer Program.  
Ms. Lai explained it is a percentage of the expense budget so with $3.4 million of additional 
investments or expenses, they have to set aside 18.5 percent of that to maintain their policy 
level.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
Council Member Burt added the dollars in the BSR would have to go up in order to retain the 
18.5.  
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director, described going through an exhaustive process for 
developing the capital budget, including a large number of proposed projects that did not make 
it into the budget and the five-year plan. He recalled a couple of projects that only totaled 
$200,000 that were some of the last ones to make it in that might come out. They determined 
what their keep-up needs for infrastructure were. A significant cut would likely come out of 
projects like street maintenance, ADA improvements, and sidewalk repairs. The missing piece 
of the Uncertainty Reserve was that as part of the 2025 budget, they are recommending 
reducing the BSR by $2 million to put into the Uncertainty Reserve to get to the $4.7 million.    
City Manager Shikada instructed that the Parking Lot was the Finance Committee’s efforts to try 
to accommodate requests to the extent that they could. In the instance of the third-party 
requests, they were received into a new program to try to address those directly without any 
commitment to fully fund those needs.  
Vice Mayor Lauing advised that the Committee intentionally left a bunch of asterisks on there in 
order to get feedback on the requests like this one.  
Kiely Nose, Assistant City Manager, explained what is before the Council for the History 
Museum shell building is a request for $1 million and is a reflection of a sharing of the cost 
inflation that occurred during the period of time the agreements were being negotiated. The 
project is not scheduled to exceed budget. This would change the terms of the tenant work 
letter changing the allocation of the HUD funding grant and swap out for some general fund 
funds if the Council chooses to go down this path. If those HUD funds are unspent on the 
project, they would be dedicated toward other museum investments. In the tenant work letter, 
there is a little over $10 million on about a $13+ million-dollar project. Included in that $10 
million is about $5 million dollars in TDRs associated with historic preservation projects.   
Council Member Veenker commented that they do not have a librarian who can meet the 
needs and develop programming specifically for the extraordinary number of teen users who go 
to the library after school.  
Gayathri Kanth, Library Services Director, described the teens who use the library after school 
and their teen advisory board. They have only one teen services librarian for all five libraries. 
She talked about how this opportunity would help them expand the teen services.   
Council Member Tanaka thought it was inappropriate to be raiding the Budget Stabilization 
Reserve at this time. He explained his belief that raising the gas utility rate from 9 percent to 
12.5 percent was in excess. He felt raising the JMZ ticket price from $10 to $14 would make it 
inaccessible to people. He did not support giving golf course discounts to people from other 
cities. He opined they should be transferring people to the vacancies instead of increasing the 
head count. He stated capital funding was an expense and found it bizarre to have it on the 
revenue list. He thought the nonprofit should take on the Roth building instead of the City. He 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
did not support half a million dollars for emergency fire and medical responses. He found the 
Ability Path matching gift questionable. He could not justify an extra $200K to PATMA. He 
thought there were a lot of special events and programming that the City was losing money on 
and deemed that inappropriate. He was not in favor of $78,000 for establishing an 
organizational development and safety division or staff members for digital marketing services. 
He did not support spending $450K on PA Link. He advised that Tesla was trying to roll out a taxi 
service and thought they should partner up with them and offer to have them test out their 
vehicles in the City. He did not think they should move forward on bathrooms until they have 
more money and the issues have been resolved about them.  
Mayor Stone was curious if the CDBG would apply to the Ability Path request. He wanted a 
better understanding of the likelihood of grant opportunities they could pursue moving 
forward. He queried if all groups that asked for funding got included within the Parking Lot. He 
asked if there was an explanation for the funding request for Magical Bridge. He wanted to 
know how much adding a bathroom within a park typically costs and if a bathroom for Pardee 
Park was included in the budget, could it be built in the next fiscal year. He questioned what 
classification of staff typically supervises the Teen Center. He thought there was a lot of 
opportunity for the recreation coordinators if they increase the pay for those positions or 
possibly finding volunteers. He suggested reevaluating that classification. He was curious to 
learn more about trying to continue programming for those who need PA Link and finding ways 
to not subsidize it for others. He supported the additions to the Fire Department and the Roth 
building funding. He wanted to know the process for the Council to be able to override the 
policy for BSR funding being below level.   
City Manager Shikada thought it was premature to make that determination because CDBG has 
its own rules and application process. It would be on the organization's initiative to apply. He 
explained this was a specific request to support programming in Palo Alto and acknowledged 
that the current programming that Magical Bridge produces is funded through their 
organization.  
Mr. Harper recalled all of the groups that requested funding were included in the Parking Lot, 
with the asterisks indicating that these were the asks from those agencies and not necessarily 
the recommended funding level. He explained the policy was to keep the BSR within a level of 
15 to 20 percent with a target of 18.5. It is up to the Council’s discretion as to whether they 
need to bring it up to that level.  
Council Member Burt added the context for Magical Bridge funding is that it is an inclusionary 
programming.  
Mr. Eggleston remarked adding a bathroom within a park was typically on the order of half a 
million. He did not think a bathroom for Pardee Park could be built in the next fiscal year. He 
stated there is funding in an existing CIP that is not yet allocated to a particular park in both 
fiscal years 2026 and 2028. The Committee had a discussion that there could be a discussion of 
priorities with the Council and the Community Services Director said they could begin some 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
outreach about Pardee Park this fall and if that was the choice of where Council wanted to 
allocate the funding, they could use the fiscal year 2026 funding the next year to pursue that 
project.  
Kristen O’Kane, Community Services Director, indicated the Teen Center is staff by recreation 
coordinators, mostly hourly CSD staff. She needed to look up the hourly rate information.  
Council Member Kou hoped Staff would reach out and have further conversations with Ability 
Path to look at where and how to manage the matching grant.  
Public Commet: 
1. 
Ken H. asked Council to delete the Cubberley lease payments from the 
nondepartmental budget summary or put it in the Parking Lot. He opined Cubberley 
repairs should be paid by the school district. He said there was no money for the future 
development of Cubberley.  
2. 
Bill R. thought a deeper dive was needed into Fire Services to include an analysis of 
automatic aids, 201 rights, and the impact of the Stanford contract. He encouraged all 
efforts to be made to have full staffing for both firefighters and paramedics.  
3. 
Nancy K. advocated prioritizing a Pardee Park restroom in the CIP on the 2026 budget. 
She wanted the City to change the outreach process so users of the Pardee Park have 
input on adding a restroom and for City Council to have the final decision after the 
outreach is completed.  
4. 
Penny P. indicated that her mother designed Eleanor Pardee Park and wanted to add a 
bathroom but at that time no neighborhood parks had bathrooms. She described how 
having no bathroom in the park is a problem. She requested for park users to have input 
in addition to the close neighbors.   
5. 
Fred B. spoke about a house fire that occurred on March 20 in which the fire engine at 
the nearby Station 2 was not deployed because there are not enough firefighters staffed 
there. He did not think they should reduce cross-staffing to no staffing for fire engines.  
6. 
Aram J. (Zoom) suggested taking the million dollars going to the Roth Museum and put it 
toward the fire stations. He would also like the City to fund Nakba Day. He wanted to 
know if the City of Palo Alto conducted any business or investments with the state of 
Israel, how overbudget the City is with the new public safety building, and what the rec 
coordinators for the libraries is being paid.  
7. 
Judy S. (Zoom) suggested taking some money from certain ethnic holiday funds and 
move it over to park elements.  
 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Kou requested to Pull Agenda Item Number 9. 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 9. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 7-8. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to approve 
Agenda Item Numbers 4-10. 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 4-6, 10:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 7-8:  6-1, Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED ITEM 9:  6-1, Kou no 
 
Public Comment: 
1. 
Herb B. requested the removal of Item 10 from the agenda because he believed that 
removing a committee member without mentioning the name of the member in the 
agenda was a violation of the Brown Act. He questioned the City Manager bringing this 
forward as he opined it was the Council’s purview.  
2. 
Aram J. (Zoom) agreed with Herb B. regarding Item 10. He advised that the individual in 
question has not been convicted.  
 
Council Member Kou had concerns about Item 9 because the Commissioners have knowledge 
of history, architecture, or historic preservation rules and they do not have very many of those 
members in the community. She thought it bore looking into the number of terms they can 
serve as well as ensuring that since they advised the Architectural Review Board on the 
historical and architectural significance of buildings, they should keep their meetings at two 
times a month and if they do not need the first or second meeting, they can choose to cancel it.  
Council Member Tanaka did not understand why they did not get bids from comparable 
vendors on Item 7. He opined the bid chosen on Item 8 was insanely expensive. 
 
4. 
Approval of Minutes from April 29, 2024 Meeting 
5. 
Adoption of a Resolution Vacating an Easement at 1020 East Meadow Circle 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
6. 
Adoption of a Resolution Vacating an Easement at 1036 East Meadow Circle 
7. 
Approval of Amended and Restated Rental Agreement C20175026A with JC Decaux San 
Francisco, LLC, in the Amount Not-to-Exceed $685,655 for a Five-year Term to Provide 
the Rental and Servicing of a single Automated Public Toilet with an option to extend for 
another Five-year term from the Termination date; CEQA Status - Exempt Under CEQA 
Guidelines Sections 15301 and 15302 
8. 
Approval of a Professional Services Contract Number C24187280 With 3Di in a Not-to 
Exceed Amount of $443,256 to Provide Rental Registry Program Software Solutions and 
Professional Services for a Term of Four-Years; CEQA Status – Not a project. 
9. 
CONSENT/Legislative: Amendments to Palo Alto Municipal Code (PAMC) Chapter 2.27, 
Historic Resources Board, Section 2.27.010 to Reduce Required Members from Seven to 
Five, Reduce the Required Number of Professionals from Three to Two, and Expand the 
Professional Fields Consistent with Certified Local Government (CLG) Requirements for 
Historic Resources Boards; and to PAMC Section 2.27.030 (a) and (b) to Reduce Regular 
Meetings to Once per Month and Reduce the Size of a Local Quorum to Three Members 
10. 
Removal of Committee Member from the Storm Water Management Oversight 
Committee; CEQA Status – Not a Project 
 
City Manager Comments 
 
 
City Manager Shikada provided a slide presentation discussing various cultural celebrations in 
the month of May, Bike to Work Day and Month and Bike to Wherever Days, Cal Ave. Street 
Design Workshop, National River Clean Up Day, and notable tentative upcoming Council items.   
 
Action Items 
11. 
2501 Embarcadero Way [22PLN-00367]: Request for Council Approval of a Site and 
Design Application to Allow the Construction of a Local Advanced Water Purification 
System at the Regional Water Quality Control Plant (RWQCP). A Design Enhancement 
Exception to Allow for a Taller Screening Wall is Also Requested. Environmental 
Assessment: Council Previously Adopted an Addendum to the 2015 Environmental 
Impact Report (EIR) for the City of Palo Alto Recycled Water Project. Zone District: PF (D) 
(Public Facility with Site and Design Combining District). 
Claire Raybould, Principal Planner, provided a slide presentation discussing the proposed local 
advanced water purification system project, including a background, project location and 
purpose, project overview, agency partners and grants, PTC review and recommendations, ARB 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
review 
and 
recommendations, 
California 
Environmental 
Quality 
Act, 
next 
steps, 
recommendation, and Public Works Applicant Team.  
 
Public Comment: 
1. 
Shani K. (Zoom) stated the Santa Clara Valley Audubon Society and the Loma Prieta 
Chapter of the Sierra Club have been advocating for an environmentally responsible 
lighting plan that uses light only when and where needed, at the lowest intensity 
needed, and provides safety for workers at the plant and at the same time protects 
birds and other species in the Baylands. She requested the ARB’s recommendations be 
accepted by the Council.  
 
Council Member Burt asked if the plants were intended to be plants indigenous to the lowlands 
adjacent to the Bay where this would be located. He queried what hours of the day the plant 
would operate. He asked if the directional lighting was LED lighting.   
Diego Martinez Garcia, Public Works Engineer, confirmed the plants were based on the North 
Bay Shore pallet from the City of Mountain View with the exception of a couple of species they 
were unable to find. The original water quality control plant operates 24/7 but the runs on this 
facility occur once in the day and once at night so they would typically see staff once per night. 
He explained all lighting is LED and focuses on the work area. As part of the planning process, a 
lighting study was performed showing how the spillover from light does not go out beyond the 
canopy.  
Council Member Tanaka queried if the capital cost is now based on usage or still fixed among all 
the cities.  
Mr. Garcia answered this project was only for recycled water so the capital difference between 
partners was different from the rest of the projects. Mountain View mainly pays for it with 
contributions from Valley Water and USBR.  
Mr. Eggleston advised that they are updating the long-range facilities plan and will look into 
recommendations for the issue Council Member Tanaka raised. They plan to bring the 
consulting contract for that effort to the Council before the summer break.  
 
MOTION:  Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Lauing to: 
1. Consider the previously adopted addendum to the City of Palo Alto Recycled Water 
Project EIR, provided in Attachment H; and, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
2. Approve the draft Record of Land Use Action (RLUA) approving the request for Site and 
Design Review as well as the requested Design Enhancement Exception based on 
findings and subject to conditions of approval. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
 
12. 
Discussion and Direction Regarding the City Council Procedures and Protocols Handbook 
- Annual Discussion as Recommended by the Policy & Services Committee 
Chantal Cotton Gains, Deputy City Manager, gave a background overview about the revision of 
the City Council Procedures and Protocols Handbook.  
Vice Mayor Lauing suggested adding another review of Commission appointments to the list. 
He recalled discussion about eliminating call-in on general public comment and that seemed to 
be a high priority item for that night. 
Council Member Burt recommended splitting Commission appointments to two times a year.  
Council Member Kou asked if the clerk’s office should be involved since they do all the 
recruitments.  
City Manager Shikada suggested including flexibility on the timing of workplans coming to the 
Council.   
Deputy City Manager Cotton Gains shared they would make sure that ties together but for the 
follow-up conversation related to Policy and Services.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to direct 
staff to shift Boards and Commissions recruitment process to twice a year at a time to be 
worked out by the City Clerk and evaluate Boards and Commissions Workplans schedule and 
present back to the City Council on Consent. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Burt pointed out the Staff reference of not being able to allow the streamline 
noticing per AB2449 if remote participation during general public comment during City Council 
meetings is removed.  
Molly Stump, City Attorney, advised that it was thought that Council could follow a procedure 
where if a Council member wanted to access that streamline, the rule could be changed on 
Zoom public comment to allow it for all parts of the agenda just for that meeting. She 
instructed that the clerk will issue a revised agenda to indicate a change for the following 
meeting.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
Council Member Burt suggested limiting general public comment to 30 minutes moving 
additional public comment to the end of the agenda.  
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Mayor Stone to amend the City Council 
Procedures and Protocols Handbook, effective immediately and to be implemented at the next 
meeting: 
1. Remote participation is not offered during General Public Comment (on items not on 
the agenda) during City Council meetings. 
MOTION PASSED:  5-2, Kou, Tanaka no 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Mayor Stone to amend the City Council 
Procedures and Protocols Handbook, effective immediately and to be implemented at the next 
meeting: 
1. General Public Comment (on items not on the agenda) is heard for 30-minutes and to 
move additional public comments to the end of the agenda. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
 
Council Member Kou suggested the need for some definition or description of the role of 
Council liaisons.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton Gains explained this was one of the items that was updated 
through the last review of the handbook. It went to Policy and Services and came back to the 
City Council earlier this year.  
Council Member Burt suggested allowing three minutes for a Council member or a member of 
the public to speak when they vote no on Consent Calendar items.  
Council Member Tanaka felt the time limit to speak should be proportioned to the number of 
items.  
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to 
update the City Council Procedures & Protocols Handbook to: 
1. When Council Members vote no on Consent Calendar Items, they have up to 3-minutes 
to speak on any and all of their no votes; and, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
2. Requests from members of the public speak to Consent Calendar Items have up to the 
Mayor's allotted time, 3-minutes or less, to speak to any and all Consent Calendar Items 
during the allotted time. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1, Tanaka no 
 
Council Member Burt brought up whether Council should refrain from taking positions on 
international affairs that are outside their purview. He suggested using San Jose and other cities 
that have done that as a reference point.  
Mayor Stone provided the San Jose language regarding this issue and had it passed to the 
members.  
Council Member Burt suggested deferring that item to the following week’s meeting. He 
advocated updating the language to clarify that the formal title addressing colleagues was 
applicable for Council Meetings but not Committee Meetings. 
Deputy City Manager Cotton Gains noted that in Attachment A, the page numbers for the 
recommended changes are sometimes incorrect, so use the section reference name.  
Mayor Stone announced Item 12 would be continued the following week.  
 
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to 
update language to clarify section 1.4b1 to reflect that the formal title addressing colleagues is 
applicable for Council Meetings and not Committee Meetings and that Committee Meetings 
may be conducted less formally. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
 
Special Orders of the Day 
13. 
Appointment of Candidates for Vacancies on the Stormwater Management Oversight 
Committee and Utilities Advisory Commission. CEQA Status - Not a project. 
Mahealani Ah Yun, City Clerk, provided a presentation outlining the vote results for the Board 
and Commission appointments.  
Utilities Advisory Commission 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
First Round of Voting for Two (2) vacancies on the Utilities Advisory Commission with terms 
ending March 31, 2027  
Abraham Bagherjeiran: Tanaka 
Ambika Pajjuri: Veenker 
Chris Tucher: Lauing, Stone, Veenker 
Richard Craig: Kou, Lythcott-Haims 
Sean Holman: Burt, Lythcott-Haims, Tanaka 
Utsav Gupta: Burt, Kou, Lauing, Stone 
Candidate Utsav Gupta receiving 4 votes is appointed to a full-term expiring March 31, 2027. 
No other Candidate received four votes required to be appointed to the full-term expiring 
March 31, 2027. A second round of voting is required. 
Second Round of Voting for One (1) vacancy on the Utilities Advisory Commission with the term 
ending March 31, 2027  
Abraham Bagherjeiran: Kou, Tanaka 
Ambika Pajjuri: 
Chris Tucher: Burt, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Veenker 
Richard Craig: 
Candidate Chris Tucher receiving 5 votes is appointed to a full-term expiring March 31, 2027. 
Stormwater Management Oversight Committee 
First Round of Voting for Three (3) vacancies on the Stormwater Management Oversight 
Committee with terms ending March 31, 2028  
Ambika Pajjuri: Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker 
Gregory Bennett: Burt, Tanaka 
Kevin Mayer: Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker 
Ronald Owes: Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Veenker 
Candidate Ambika Pajjuri receiving 7 votes is appointed to a full-term expiring March 31, 
2028. 
Candidate Kevin Mayer receiving 6 votes is appointed to a full-term expiring March 31, 2028. 
Candidate Ronald Owes receiving 6 votes is appointed to a full-term expiring March 31, 2028. 
First Round of Voting for one (1) vacancy on the Stormwater Management Oversight 
Committee partial term ending March 31, 2026  
Ambika Pajjuri: 
Gregory Bennett: Kou, Lauing, Stone, Veenker 
Kevin Mayer: Burt 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 17 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  05/13/2024 
Ronald Owes: Lythcott-Haims 
Candidate Gregory Bennett receiving 4 votes is appointed to a partial term expiring March 31, 
2026. 
 
Closed Session 
14. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY- EXISTING LITIGATION Subject: Packard v. Ravi, City 
of Palo Alto Superior Court Case No. 21-CV-383384 (One Case, as Defendant) Authority: 
Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(1) 
Lythcott-Haims recused herself from the Closed Session discussion. 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Veenker to go into 
Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 10:10 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 10:22 P.M. 
Mayor Stone announced no reportable action. 
 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:26 P.M. 
 
