CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 14 
 Special Meeting 
 
April 15, 2024 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual 
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka 
Present Remotely:  
 
Veenker 
Absent: 
 
 
Call to Order 
Mayor Stone called the meeting to order. The clerk called roll with six present.  
 
Special Orders of the Day 
1. 
Proclamation Honoring National Animal Control Officer Appreciation Week - April 14-20, 
2024 
NO ACTION 
Vice Mayor Lauing read the proclamation honoring National Animal Control Officer 
Appreciation Week.  
Police Chief Andrew Binder spoke in appreciation of the community’s animal control officers. 
2. 
Proclamation Honoring National Public Safety Telecommunicators’ Week - April 15-19, 
2024 
NO ACTION 
Council 
Member 
Kou 
read 
the 
proclamation 
honoring 
National 
Public 
Safety 
Telecommunicators’ Week.  
Police Chief Binder spoke in appreciation of the community’s dispatchers.  
 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
Agenda Changes, Additions, and Deletions 
None.  
 
Public Comment 
Mayor Stone set ground rules for public speakers.  
1. 
Sarit speaking on behalf of (8): Miriam, Eric, Rotem, Jennifer, Henriette, Susan, and Itai 
spoke about the hostages held by Hamas. She discussed the upcoming Passover 
celebration and compared the plight of the hostages. She urged the condemnation of 
Hamas.  
2. 
Alan, speaking on behalf of (8) Shira, Einav, Gary, Maya, Erik, Allyson R., and Avner, 
talked about a protest held two weeks prior in Palo Alto that violated the peaceful 
protest permit. He outlined actions the City could take to prevent further incidents such 
as this. He mentioned an upcoming similar event that has been granted a permit and his 
fear of the risk of violence. He asked Council to consider if groups with a history of 
violating the law be allowed to demonstrate in the future without providing assurances 
that they will adhere to permits and laws. He wanted to know what the City and law 
enforcement was doing to prepare for the upcoming event.   
3. 
Estee G. demonstrated how the war of Hamas is a complicated international issue 
beyond the jurisdiction of the City of Palo Alto.  
4. 
Loren T. raised concerns with the way the Palo Alto Police Department handled her 
father’s case who died in April 2017 from a traumatic four-story fall while he was 
checked in as a patient at Stanford Medical Center. She believed this to be a cover up by 
the Police Department that the City Attorney supports.  
5. 
Noel S. commented about problems with organizations conflating criticism of Israel and 
Zionism.  
6. 
Sheira (Zoom) discussed the average combatant to civilian death ratio in Gaza at 1 to 0.7 
which is 13 times less than the UN reported average ratio in urban warfare.  
7. 
Liz G. (Zoom) wanted to know the neighborhood designation of Mayfield Place 
affordable housing. She expressed having difficulty identifying her household address.  
8. 
Martin W. (Zoom) talked about the requests trying to force the Council to pass a 
ceasefire resolution. He remarked it was important to realize this was part of a national 
movement meant to bring down our institutions.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
9. 
Lori M. asked Council to take action to make things better in Palo Alto by starting 
antisemitism training and enforcing laws.  
10. 
Ali discussed ways that calling for a ceasefire resolution is a local issue. 
11. 
Deborah G. explained how the requests for a ceasefire are about a culture war.  
12. 
Aram J. (Zoom) expressed disdain for what he referred to as white supremist Jews.  
13. 
Yazan (Zoom) brought attention to events in the West Bank. He commented supporting 
a ceasefire would mean supporting a ceasefire in the West Bank as well as in Gaza and 
across all of the region.  
14. 
Tal S. (Zoom) urged City Council and Palo Alto Police to take proactive measures to block 
any unacceptable and unlawful behavior at the upcoming protest rally.    
 
Council Member Veenker Joined City Council Meeting by teleconference at 5:57 P.M. She 
invoked AB 2449 and provided the address from which she was attended. She declared there 
was no one over the age of 18 present with her.  
 
Council Member Questions, Comments, and Announcements 
Council Member Kou spoke about the Palo Alto Emergency Services Volunteers performing an 
emergency drill by simulating an earthquake and discussed the importance of communication 
during the event.  
Mayor Stone talked about his experience visiting the sister city of Tsuchiura, Japan. He 
announced an ad-hoc committee addition and change. He also announced that he and Vice 
Mayor Lauing agreed to issue $812 from the Council Contingency Fund to cover the rental fee 
at Lucie Stern Community Center for a children’s day event being organized by a local Turkish-
Americans Association. He spoke about the many comments and emails the City Council has 
received related to the events in the Middle East, including requests regarding for and against 
adopting a ceasefire resolution. He explained how cities do not have jurisdiction over 
international affairs. He remarked that they do believe the City has an interest and 
responsibility to ensure that residents feel heard, respected, and safe. To this end, he agreed to 
meet with some of the more vocal public commenters, with Council Member Veenker, a 
professional mediator, joining in facilitating the conversation. He described three meetings held 
at City Hall that afforded these residents with diverse perspectives a chance to be heard and 
have their viewpoints respected and are hopeful the participants will follow the suggestions 
made during the meetings to plan and carry out community programs to build relationships and 
community.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 6, 8. 
MOTION:  Council Member Lythcott-Haims moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 3-12. 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 3-5, 7, 9-12:  7-0 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 6, 8:  6-1, Tanaka no 
 
Council Member Tanaka described the issues he had with Items 6 and 8 resulting in his no vote.  
 
3. 
Approval of Minutes from the March 18, 2024 and March 25, 2024 Meetings. 
4. 
Approve the Reliability and Resiliency Strategic Plan as Recommended by the Utilities 
Advisory Commission; CEQA Status: exempt, not a project 
5. 
Approval of Construction Contract C24190225 with Graham Contractors, Inc. in an 
Amount Not-to-Exceed $1,594,195 and Authorization for the City Manager or Their 
Designee to Negotiate and Execute Change Orders for Related Additional but 
Unforeseen Work that may Develop During the Project Up to a Not-to-Exceed Amount 
of $159,420 for the Fiscal Year 2024 Streets Preventive Maintenance Project, Capital 
Improvement Program Projects PE-86070, and PO-11001; CEQA status – exempt under 
CEQA Guidelines Section 15301(c) 
6. 
Staff Recommends Increasing the Budget for the Advanced Heat Pump Water Heater 
Pilot Program by $846,000 to Increase Participation with Higher Rebates, and Amend 
the Fiscal Year Budget Appropriation for the Gas Fund; CEQA Status: Not a Project under 
CEQA Guidelines Section 15378(b)(5) 
7. 
Approval of Contract No. C24189918 with BKF Engineers, through December 31 2025, in 
an Amount Not to Exceed $109,583, for Professional Design and Engineering Services for 
the Foothills Nature Preserve Improvements Project (PE-21000); CEQA Status – Exempt 
under CEQA Guidelines Section 15301 
8. 
Approval of a Blanket Purchase Order With Eaton (Cooper Power Systems, LLC) for the 
Purchase of Pad-Mounted Electric Equipment for the Utility’s Electric Distribution 
System Not to Exceed $750,000 per Year for a Total Not-To-Exceed Amount of 
$5,250,000 for 7 Years; CEQA Status – Exempt Under CEQA Guidelines Section 15301 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
9. 
Approval of Professional Services Contract Number C24189405 with Tetra Tech, Inc. in 
an amount not to exceed $300,000 for On-Call Emergency Management Support 
Services for a Period of Six Years; CEQA Status – Not a Project. 
10. 
Approval of Contract Amendment Number 2 to Seven On-call Consulting Contracts to 
Increase in the Amount by $500,000 to a Total Not to Exceed to $3.5 Million and Extend 
Term by Three Months to Provide Expertise for Long Range Planning Projects, 
Application Processing, Environmental Review, and Other Planning Analysis in the 
Planning and Development Services Department. 
11. 
Approval of: (1) Contract No. 4524000393 with StarChase, LLC for GPS Vehicle Tracking 
Implementation for a three-year term in an amount not to exceed $224,657; and (2) 
StarChase GPS Vehicle Tracking Technology Surveillance Use Policy; CEQA status – 
categorically exempt. 
12. 
Authorization to Execute Amendment to Legal Services Contract S24189355 with Allen, 
Glaessner, Hazelwood & Werth to Increase Amount by $50,000 for Total Not-to-Exceed 
Amount of $135,000; CEQA Status – Not a Project. 
 
City Manager Comments 
 
 
City Manager Shikada provided a slide presentation detailing construction updates, openings 
for volunteers on the historic resources board, the upcoming Palo Alto Earth Day Festival, and 
notable tentative upcoming Council items.   
 
BREAK (5-10 MINUTES) / CONVENE CITY COUNCIL and PLANNING & TRANSPORTATION 
MEETING 
 
The City Council and Planning and Transportation Commission of the City of Palo Alto met on 
this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 6:46 P.M. 
 
PTC Commissioners Present In Person: 
Summa, Hechtman, Reckdahl, Templeton, Lu, Akin 
PTC Commissioners Present Remotely:  
Chang 
 
Action Items 
13. 
Joint City Council and Planning and Transportation Commission Meeting to Adopt a 
Resolution Amending the Comprehensive Plan by Adopting a Revised 2023-31 Housing 
Element. California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA): The City Council adopted a 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
Revised Addendum to the Comprehensive Plan Final Environmental Impact Report on 
December 18, 2023 that, in conjunction with the Comprehensive Plan Final EIR, fully 
analyzes the impacts associated with adoption of the Revised 2023-2031 Housing 
Element. 
Jean Eisberg, Principal Consultant Lexington Planning, provided a slide presentation to include 
stating the purpose of the meeting, recent milestones, public comments received, HCD 
comments, August 3, 2023, HCD comment letter, work completed in response to comments, 
affirmatively furthering fair housing, sites inventory, constraints, programs (key changes – 
modifications and additions), CEQA: environmental review – addendum, CEQA analysis – 
conclusion, non-CEQA: traffic level of service analysis, next steps, staff recommendations and 
meeting sequence.  
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, added they could incorporate and 
adjust any minor changes Council proposed. Any substantive changes would take more time to 
understand the implications and return back to the Council for action.   
 
Public Comment: 
1. 
Deborah G. provided some pictures of traffic in and out of the JCC from her bike. She 
was not in favor of the plan.  
2. 
Hamilton H. described how HCD was overreaching the cause of the state. He asked 
Council to pass this latest version of the Housing Element and asked HCD to certify the 
Housing Element so the City could focus on implementing these programs.  
3. 
Lisa M.  
4. 
Adam S. felt it was imperative to build a lot more houses immediately at all income 
levels to rectify the housing crisis. He spoke about a letter in the record that makes 
specific suggestions which he endorsed.  
5. 
Emily R., SV@Home, expressed concern with the current draft of the Housing Element 
and outlined some key requests and recommendations.   
6. 
Scott O. encouraged Council to ask City Staff to focus on delivering a strong hip to add 
into the package that would move the needle in a way the ECR focus area does not.   
7. 
Liz G. (Zoom) spoke against the overreach of putting 2000 units of housing in the 
industrial area of Fabian and San Antonio. Her suggestion was to put housing within the 
R1 zones.   
8. 
Aram J. (Zoom) expressed his disappointment in the progress of the Housing Element. 
He pushed that at least 20 percent of housing go to African Americans in reparations.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
9. 
Michael Q. talked about lawsuit in another town regarding a Housing Element. He 
opined the best way to avoid interference from Sacramento was to pass a good Housing 
Element that would keep them certified in the future.  
10. 
Amie A. urged Council to replicate the projects approved as part of the El Camino Real 
focus area. She described why she supported housing.  
11. 
John K. (Zoom) associated himself with the remarks of Adam S., Emily R., Scott O., and 
Amie A. He emphasized that ADUs appear to play a much more consequential role in the 
City’s overall assessment of its RHNA targets and represent the entire buffer the City has 
going forward. He thought it was important that the City act now before submitting this 
to the HCD to address the inequities and impact fees the City Staff has acknowledged.  
 
Planning and Transportation Commission 
PTC Commissioner Templeton asked how Staff would respond to the public comments 
suggesting they would get rejected again. 
Director Lait answered they believed the document would meet HCD’s state law requirements. 
They had met with their reviewer and his supervisor five to six times in the last three months 
and were able to provide direct edits that were shown in the review, which seemed to be in line 
with the expectations. He noted that even though they had gone through that process, it was 
not an indication of HCD’s support of the document.  
PTC Commissioner Lu discussed comments made by HCD about timelines asking for color on 
what was said and if it had been thoroughly addressed. He was concerned about specific 
mandates given by HCD not being addressed. He wanted to know if there were any particularly 
important HCD concerns that Staff did not feel comfortable editing a program on but that PTC 
or Council feedback would be useful. He asked what areas of Alma are referred to in the 
“Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing” update and asked for details about the selection of the 
neighborhoods referenced.  
Director Lait answered there are a number of programs in the Housing Element and part of the 
Staff’s sensitivity throughout the process is their ability to deliver on those items and policy 
initiatives within the timelines that have been estimated. He explained there has been a back 
and forth with HCD to reconcile the staff capacity, resources and projects to implement the 
Housing Element while taking all the other City Council priorities into consideration. They were 
able to talk to the HCD supervisor and identify which ones had a higher effect toward housing 
production or preservation. He explained their approach in addressing the timeline. He stated 
they felt they took their first cut of trying to understand what HCD was asking for in their 
comment letter, got as far as they could, and wanted to initiate direct conversations with the 
reviewer and supervisor to make sure they were not missing anything. Through those meetings, 
they were able to ask any ambiguities they had from the comment letter and get specific 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
responses back. Edits and changes were made based on that feedback and those revisions sent 
back to HCD for a courtesy review.    
Brenna Weatherby, Principal Rincon Consultants, remarked HCD Staff was comfortable with the 
language submitted. She explained that the neighborhoods were being referenced in those 
programs because they were called out in the AFFH analysis as areas of concern or special 
needs. She clarified Alma Street was a vague reference in those programs because the areas 
that have concentrated pockets of individual populations varies so HCD was comfortable with 
just referring to Alma Street.    
PTCC Vice Chair Chang asked for information about how many municipalities are in a similar 
boat. She wanted to know how much Staff time has been spent thus far and how much more 
will be needed.  
Director Lait did not have information on hand regarding other municipalities in a similar boat. 
He recalled there were 20 percent that were outstanding for certification and almost every 
jurisdiction has had more than one review. He explained there was not a list of hours spent on 
this particular project. They believe they have the Housing Element certified. As part of City 
Council’s annual review of priority objectives, they submitted a list of Housing Element related 
implementation tasks. He believed they are resourced to meet those timelines.   
PTC Commissioner Hechtman referenced a statement “All 10 of these sites have been identified 
by the City for rezoning to accommodate higher unit capacity,” and suggested referring to that 
as “had been rezoned”.  
PTC Commissioner Akin found the new site selections and realistic capacity analysis more 
rigorous. He liked the representative sites documentation. He found the distribution of low- 
and moderate-income units by racial minority population is equitable and noticeably better 
than the last iteration. He felt Staff had addressed HCD’s concerns adequately.    
PTC Commissioner Reckdahl thought defending GM and ROLM was compelling. He spoke about 
the demand of housing near the Googleplex and the North Bay Shore development which he 
thought could be played up.  
PTC Commissioner Templeton remarked that the plan was imperfect, but the most important 
thing was to move forward.   
PTC Commissioner Hechtman thought the timeline was interesting and informative. He was 
hesitant to substitute his judgement after his limited hours of study with the hundreds of hours 
their staff and consultants had put into building this and took comfort in their results. He was 
ready to move forward with the recommendation of Council.   
PTC Commissioner Lu called out a concern about prioritizing their analysis, funding, and 
resources for affordable housing to build more affordable housing on the other side of 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
Embarcadero and, to a lesser extent, South Ventura where there are not good resources. With 
that concern flagged, he would move this forward.   
MOTION:  Commissioner Akin moved, seconded by Commissioner Templeton to recommend 
City Council adopt the Revised 2023-31 Housing Element. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked Commissioner Lu to what extent there is truth about not 
putting housing on the northeast portion of 101 and to what extent the future informed by this 
Housing Element could contain housing there that is affirmatively furthering fair housing.  
PTC Commissioner Lu talked about the number of market-rate housing proposed in an office 
complex close to the Geng Road site, which he believed was the only site they added in their 
site inventory in that area. He did not think there were any other sites that address how to 
affirmatively further fair housing in that area. He explained 2.1C references affordable housing 
overall. There is also mention in Program 6.1 where special needs housing will be prioritized in 
those three areas. In Program 6.2, there is also mention of how encouraging family housing 
would be prioritized. In 6.7, there is community outreach through those areas.  
PTC Commissioner Templeton said there were a couple of considerations they talked about in 
the past for that space regarding suitability for housing and it had to do a lot with the 
surrounding nature area and amount of light might interfere with their intent for that space.  
PTCC Vice Chair Chang remembered a discussion PTC had about housing either close to 101 or 
the other side. There were concerns about flood risk, being too close to the freeway and 
proximity of the wildlife corridor.  
Council Member Burt added that over the years they have looked at what could be done in the 
East Bay Shore area and in addition to the lack of schools and safe and reasonable access to 
schools, there was a lack of services, the density has been minimized as it is natural land and 
there is one level F intersection that basically serves that.  
Council Member Veenker recused herself due to conflicts of interest.  
Council Member Burt recalled a public comment concerned about the existing office towers 
being demolished in order to have housing at Palo Alto Square Properties, but it was his 
understanding that the housing would be additive on the vast amount of surface parking.  
Director Lait confirmed that and noted that Palo Alto Square is not a housing opportunity site in 
the Housing Element. He added the conversation about that site is about additive parking and 
nothing to do with removing existing office square footage. He stated there are a lot of 
properties not listed as housing opportunity sites that will benefit from additional zoning the 
City Council has authorized. This goes to the conversation about the buffer.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
Council Member Burt opined that goes to a concern raised whether a specific site might need 
to be removed from the housing inventory, but it is anticipated they will be able to add more 
sites than prospectively removed.  
Director Lait agreed there would most likely be scenarios where it may not align with what was 
envisioned in the Housing Element. They have a program to monitor that on an annual basis. If 
they need to identify another site, they believe there will be adequate capacity to make that 
change.  
Mayor Stone was curious how ADUs accounted for the various income categories. He asked for 
detail on Program 4.5.  
Director Lait explained there is a projection for ADUs for the RHNA cycle that is based on actual 
permits they have issued over an average of three years. They think they will exceed that 
projection by the time they reach the planning horizon. As far as how those units are 
designated into different income categories, ABAG has put together a technical assistance 
document that examined cities throughout the region. Based on their survey, they found that a 
certain percentage of ADUs tend to be income restricted at the different affordability levels 
they need to plan for in RHNA. It was not an exhaustive survey. His understanding was that HCD 
was relying on that guidance from ABAG and allowing that to be used as jurisdictions are 
allowed to use those thresholds that are defined in that technical assistance document and 
apply that to the housing element.  
Ms. Weatherby added that HCD does like to see that look back at three to five years’ worth of 
data on existing ADU and construction trends. They were told those numbers were 
conservative, but it does not mean that additional ADU units cannot be constructed.  
Director Lait noted as a part of their programs they would do a survey of ADUs that they can 
begin to get some local data about affordability for ADUs that they would look at in the 
upcoming years. He explained Program 4.5 was added directly in response to City Council’s 
direction. They were putting together information on the website to help guide developers to 
that. They would take that opportunity to make them aware of this program, direct them to the 
website and encourage them to consider hiring in accordance with this program objective.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked Director Lait what he would add to make this draft 
stronger in the realm of reducing governmental constraints on the construction of housing. 
Director Lait thought they had covered all that is needed to meet the state requirements. He 
described it as a key program related to the housing incentive program, which is intended to 
allow them to look beyond the statutory obligations to see how they could further housing 
production in Palo Alto. They have a program timeline to complete that by December if not 
sooner. He gave examples of what the HIP Program will enable.   
Ms. Eisberg explained the Housing Incentive Program is a local alternative to state density 
bonus law. It applies to just a few zoning districts. It stipulates a small menu of options for how 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
to increase densities and provide modifications to certain development standards. She 
described the geographic expansion. She opined it is buried in the code so with the recent 
rezonings, they have created a new section of the code to consolidate the Housing Incentive 
Program into the new chapter and develop new standards to make sure it is a feasible program. 
They are looking to bring that forward to the ARB and Planning Commission for study sessions 
early this summer with the intent to have an ordinance before the end of the year.  
Director Lait advised there would be public hearings and an opportunity for the public to 
examine the proposals being made and evaluate it to the programs they have in the Housing 
Element making sure there is alignment in what the stated objective is and what they are doing 
from an ordinance perspective.  
Council Member Burt followed up on the local workforce issue commenting that their ability to 
provide adequate housing as a region economically is very constrained by the available skilled 
workforce, yet they have many residents in neighboring communities who would welcome 
opportunities for high income skilled workforce jobs. What lacks is a strategic plan at the state 
and regional level. For the housing advocates, this can move the dial on housing. He thought an 
important correction was the fact that they would be moving to a square footage-based fee 
program which would also apply to the ADUs which would result in exceeding ADUs. He 
questioned if there was a plan to address the separate utility hookups on ADUs. 
Director Lait explained the process of prorating the ADU fees. He needed to dig more into the 
issue of separate utility hookups for ADUs and would follow up on that. He did not think it 
require a change to the Housing Element in terms of programming. He pointed out these were 
the things not getting done because of having to keep working on the Housing Element.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked if they should revise the Housing Element further to say 
it has been done.  
Director Lait answered they have a deadline in the program by the end of the year to complete 
it. He would not hold up submitting the document to HCD.  
Vice Mayor Lauing mentioned that many sections in this Housing Element are being requested 
for the first time in state history so had to be created from scratch. The process required 
additions and deletions and a number came from the public. He felt like it was a community 
effort. He pointed out that the process with HCD has been a massive time and dollar 
investment by the majority of the Planning Department and these resources are scarce and as a 
result a lot of other important things are not getting done. He mentioned other programs 
coming up that were more numerous than the old Housing Element. He detailed some 
programs that the public has commented should be added and he stated they are working on 
those now. Doing these additions to the plan are not necessary to get this certified and meet 
their quotas. They still have plenty of sites and the buffer is liberal. He felt it was time to act 
and urged his colleagues to approve the plan.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims recalled the discussion about how the area northeast of 101 
has historically tended to be an undesirable area for housing yet they seem to have four 
programs that contemplate putting either very large families, low-income folks, female-headed 
households, seniors, homeless and people of special needs. She felt concern that could 
effectively be a segregation of people who need to be closer to transit, grocery, amenities and 
quality of life stuff unless they plan to build a brand-new neighborhood there. She asked why 
not instead build a new village residential out there at a variety of affordability levels.  
Ms. Weatherby explained there is a small cluster of homes out there now. Because of that, that 
area is included in the AFFH analysis. When HCD takes a look at the AFFH analysis, they use data 
from their viewer. The information is available online. That is the information they pull into the 
AFFH analysis because HCD does not know every community by heart and rely on the data 
presented there. They did detail in Appendix C that there were some small pockets of special 
needs populations in that area. Because of that, HCD requires those geographic targeting to 
affirmatively further the fair housing within that area. This could be new housing, but it could 
also be other things to be done to further fair housing. She described what the programs spoke 
to. Not all programs that call out that area are related to the development of new housing. 
Even ones that do could be speaking toward rehab. She pointed out the reference to housing 
that is located there in Appendix C.  
Director Lait noted that except for one site east of 101 they are not proposing other properties 
as a housing opportunity site. The programs they have are state mandated requirements they 
are needing to respond to based on an existing condition.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims registered her concern, hope and expectation that they will 
not choose to put special populations with greater needs on the edge of town. She was 
interested in why they would not extend the El Camino focus area that they knew would bring 
forth projects which would result in the new units sprinkled throughout the City. She was 
curious to what extend does the team engage with developers and try to move past the thread 
of Builder’s Remedy to a place of cooperation. She wanted to understand why they would not 
relax the Retail Preservation Ordinance at Cal Ave and downtown. 
Director Lait agreed that could be done and would be a policy decision for the City Council. He 
noted they have already directed Staff through their objectives discussion on priorities to begin 
that work and they have a timeline to complete that by June of next year. If they want to have 
Staff draft program language to memorialize work they have already directed them to do, they 
can include that in as a program in this Housing Element if there is majority support. He 
explained they have a number of Builder’s Remedy applications on file that are being processed 
like any other application. There are outstanding legal questions related to that that will need 
to be addressed at the appropriate time. He added they have seen the results of some of the 
early conversation with developers in the form of the housing focus area development 
standards. He noted it was not correct to conclude that the Builder’s Remedy projects coming 
in represent what needs to be built in order to have an economically viable project. These are 
projects that have no limits and are being proposed at standards that exceed any reasonable 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
return. It is not a baseline by which to measure future zoning regulations. He spoke about the 
core of University and California Avenue where they have ground floor protection zoning in 
place to protect the walkable experience. This could change as a policy from City Council if they 
get that direction. Where they have talked about an abundance of retail and an abundance of 
retail square footage as reported in the Street Sense document that the Council has reviewed, 
it may not be that they want to reduce the excess retail square footage in the core commercial 
retail areas but on the periphery or in areas that do not have the same walkable convenience or 
other amenities to support that retail. Their approach has been protecting the retail where it 
exists today on the ground floor of these two downtowns and allow for some flexibility to 
modify or reduce the retail preservation standards elsewhere. For the past three months, the 
PTC has been having conversations related to retail including the Retail Preservation Ordinance 
and hope to come to City Council before they go on summer recess to seek guidance on specific 
policies they recommend, and Council would like to see advanced.  
Council Member Kou wanted to know if there was any program that says sales tax of materials 
purchased by developers would come to the City. She explained how she did not see the City 
becoming more inclusive through this effort and did not support it.  
Director Lait did not think there was any program related to sales tax and would be governed 
by state law.  
City Manager Ed Shikada was familiar with the sales tax issue Council Member Kou referred to, 
but he was not sure about the specific application and how it fit. He offered to take it as a 
referral for Staff to follow up on and report back on any issues with implementation.  
Vice Mayor Lauing opined this would be outside of the jurisdiction of what HCD was evaluating 
for compliant Housing Element. It would be more like a program or policy they would put in 
effect in the City.   
Council Member Veenker asked Director Laid if he felt they had the flexibility to respond to 
certain items or comments from HCD without coming back to the Council with this motion.  
Director Lait answered that was embedded in the resolution that is included in the motion.  
There was discussion regarding the wording of the motion and the revisions.  
Albert Yang, Assistant City Attorney 
Molly Stump, City Attorney 
Council Member Tanaka 
 
Council Member Veenker recused on Stanford University related properties/programs and 
First Congregational Church portions of the Item. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 14 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/15/2024 
City Council 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to adopt a 
Resolution (Attachment B) making the findings required under CEQA and Housing Element Law, 
and adopt the Revised 2023-31 Housing Element as an amendment to the City’s Comprehensive 
Plan, and direct staff to: 
1. Add new program to align with Council’s direction to extend the Housing Focus Area 
along El Camino Real; and, 
2. Reexamine the existing housing conditions East of Bay Shore subsequent to the 
submittal of the Housing Element and make any adjustments accordingly. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1, Kou no 
 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 9:30 P.M. 
 
