CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 18
Regular Meeting
March 18, 2024
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely:  
Absent:  
Mayor Stone called the meeting to order. The clerk called roll with all being present.    
Special Orders of the Day
1. 
Proclamation Welcoming Exchange Students and Chaperones from Sister City Tsuchiura, 
Ibaraki, Japan.  
NO ACTION TAKEN
Mayor Stone read a proclamation welcoming exchange students and chaperones from Sister
City Tsuchiura, Ibaraki, Japan. 
Sarah Burgess, Neighbors Abroad President, spoke about the student exchange program. 
Mr. So Karato, City of Tsuchiura, International
Exchange Division discussed the student
exchange program.   
Closed Session
2. 
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION Authority: Cal Govt Code 54957 Title: 
City Manager – Mid-Year Check-In
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to go into Closed
Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
Public Comment:  
1. 
Liz G. ( Zoom) spoke about the quality of life for lower-income individuals in California
and expressed her opposition in giving the City Manager another raise. She discussed
some incidents with City Manager Shikada that she disagreed with.  
2. 
Aram J. ( Zoom) discussed his thoughts about some of City Manager Shikada’ s actions
asking for him to be fired.   
Council went into Closed Session at 5:49 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 7:10 P.M. 
Mayor Stone announced no reportable action. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
City Manager Shikada announced the action items for the evening.  
Mahealani Ah Yun, City Clerk, reported that they were in the process of troubleshooting the
YouTube streaming. She recommended that the public viewers switch to Zoom. 
Public Comment
Mayor Stone set some ground rules for public comment. 
1. 
Giora speaking on behalf of (7): Ilana C., Yaron, Eric S., Edith C., Avivit S., Yishai S. 
provided a slide show presentation discussing what a ceasefire declaration by the Palo
Alto City Council would and would not accomplish and acts of antisemitism that have
occurred in the City. He asked why the synagogue had to be behind iron gratings. He
stated a ceasefire resolution would support terrorism. He requested Council reject a
ceasefire.   
2. 
Makenzie speaking on behalf of (6): Jon H., Carolee H., Jessie H., Lubna Q., Tuba S. 
talked about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the large number of Palestinian deaths
including children. She discussed Israel’ s history of and ongoing discrimination of
Palestine. She questioned why the Council passed a proclamation concerning the events
of October 7 and stated this exposed their prejudice. She asked them to act accordingly
to their statement on their website which states that Palo Alto “ is actively engaged in
making a difference both locally and globally” by declaring a ceasefire.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/18/2024
3. 
Deborahlise speaking on behalf of (6): Lily B., Yazan A., MaLisa M., Paul J., Alysha D. read
a passage written by Theodor Herzl that stated his determination to create a Jewish
state in order to resolve the Jewish problem in Europe in the 30s. She proclaimed Israel
to be the Zionist’s colonial project and discussed how the conflict is damaging the
ecosystem.  
4. 
Linor speaking on behalf of (7): Sarit S., Rebecca S., Avner, Jennifer F., David C., Miriam
R. described how calling for a ceasefire resolution would serve the interest of Hamas. 
She encouraged a call for a return of the hostages, surrender of Hamas and the mutual
recognition of the right of both Israelis and Palestinians to self-determination.   
5. 
Kshama K. speaking on behalf of (6): Craig K., Alice K., Jill B., Karen B., Deborah F. spoke
about Living Wisdom High School and how it benefits its students. She described how it
is limited in its ability to serve students because of the limited space it occupies in
Cubberley. She asked for Council’ s support in working with Living Wisdom and
Cubberley to allow them to use the unused space in Cubberley Community Center.  
6. 
Jay I. described how Living Wisdom High School uplifts its students and inspires them to
be their best selves. He expressed hope that the school can expand.  
7. 
Krishav G. focused on reasons Living Wisdom should be allowed to utilize the current
empty space within the Cubberley Community to expand their campus.   
8. 
Shreya T. hoped Council would take into consideration their request to expand the
community of Living Wisdom High School. 
9. 
Nicholas M. declared that Living Wisdom High School has changed his life and the
benefits of the ability to expand the school.   
10. 
Hari V. discussed drawbacks of very large academic institutions and how Living Wisdom
overcomes this.   
11. 
Baatcha D. talked about the role Living Wisdom plays regarding the emotional, social
and intellectual needs of kids toward the end the spectrum. He asked Council to help
them all they could. 
12. 
Hazemach recalled how Living Wisdom was a haven for him as he grew up in a difficult
home and requested Council’ s support for expanding their space.   
13. 
Keshava B. discussed that Living Wisdom High School provides opportunity for hope in
the world for children.   
14. 
Shamti R. talked about many high school students who have come to her over the years
as a practicing community physician due to stress from issues at home, socially and
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
politically. She spoke about the joy and stability the students are provided from Living
Wisdom. 
15. 
David G., mental health professional, feared for the current state of young people. He
has seen what the Living Wisdom school system has done for the youth over the
decades. He asked Council to accommodate their need for more space.  
16. 
Eric M. commented that there is a waitlist for Living Wisdom High School and the extra
space would allow them to serve twice as many students as they currently do. He asked
for Council’ s help in making more rooms available.  
17. 
Ana De J. P. expressed her love of Living Wisdom High School and how more space is
required. 
18. 
Christopher De J. P. thought the most important thing Living Wisdom taught him is
connection. He asked Council to help provide more space for them.  
19. 
Seema C. described how Living Wisdom has helped her daughter. She expressed hope in
their ability to serve more kids.  
20. 
Eve W. discussed how her child struggled in public school and how Living Wisdom has
been transformational for him and her family. She hoped Council would grant the school
additional space.  
21. 
Ken H. expressed his passion about Cubberley honoring additional space for the
students.  
22. 
Estee G. 
23. 
Michael F. discussed health issues created by Assembly Bill 967 and Toilet to Tap to
Table Act which allows the liquid from cremation to be poured down the drain to be
converted into drinking water.  
24. 
Carol G. (Zoom)  
25. 
Shani K. talked about the potential extinction of the burrowing owl and a petition by the
Santa Clara Valley Audabon Society attempting to protect them.   
26. 
Liz G. (Zoom) wanted to let Council know that she has been silenced psychologically and
emotionally because if she takes a ceasefire side she is deemed a terrorist and if she
takes an Israeli side then she is for the killing of large numbers of people in Palestine.   
27. 
Syed ( Zoom) asked City Council to agendize a resolution for ceasefire. He outlined a
news report he read about the situation in Palestine. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
28. 
Lori M. referenced two articles in the packet telling how to stop City Councils from doing
municipal business every week and a cover story from this month’ s Atlantic with
highlighted sections portraying what it is like to be Jewish in the Bay Area post October
7. She implored Council to make the pro-ceasefire driven hate go away.  
29. 
Jamal K. brought up a resolution recently passed by the Santa Clara Democratic Central
Committee calling for a ceasefire. His request was for City Council to agendize a similar
resolution.  
30. 
Michelle H. spoke about the many Palestinian children that have been killed and the
need to call for a ceasefire.  
31. 
Aram J. supported Palo Alto putting a resolution on for permanent and immediate
ceasefire.    
32. 
Talha B. ( Zoom) clarified that being pro ceasefire does not mean supporting Hamas or
being antisemitic. It would mean saving every life possible.  
33. 
Paul J. ( Zoom)  
34. 
Lily B. (Zoom)  
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements
Council Member Lythcott-Haims discussed a letter she received from third graders at Hoover
Elementary School indicating they are studying the people and departments in community
governments. They had questions including how much money is received from taxes, how they
make people agree to the laws and what was the latest decision made.   
Vice Mayor Lauing noted that the Retail Ad-Hoc Committee meets at 9 a.m. on Wednesday in
the Community Room. The public is invited, especially retailers and Council Members.  
Council Member Burt shared that the previous Thursday the Caltrain Local Policy Maker Group
had a workshop in Redwood City that Council Members Lauing and Lythcott-Haims joined him
at. He detailed the focus of the workshop. He encouraged his colleagues to keep an eye open
for the quarterly workshops of the LPMG.  
Mayor Stone announced that he and the Vice Mayor have agreed to allocate $ 1000 from the
Council Contingency Funds toward the purchase of supplies for children to be able to make
hygiene kits for the ecumenical hunger program at an upcoming Ramadan event.    
Study Session
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/18/2024
4. Presentation from Cal Poly San Luis Obispo Community Planning Studio on its Findings
Related to San Antonio Road Corridor Existing Conditions and Alternatives Report. CEQA
Status - Not a project. 
NO ACTION TAKEN
Jonathan Lait, Planning Director, outlined Cal Poly’s planning program and its benefits and a
request for proposals their staff is preparing. He provided an email address for community
members interested in providing any advanced feedback regarding a future area plan. 
Jake Jansen started a slide presentation about Cal Poly’s vision for the future of the San Antonio
Corridor to include an agenda, introduction of who they are, discussion of the Corridor, key
deliverables, the Land Use Plan, proposed and existing land use and proposed and existing
zoning.     
Elena
Blewett
continued
the
slide
presentation
discussing
the
transportation
plan, 
transportation issues, improvement recommendations, San Antonio Road at Fabian Way, San
Antonio Road at San Antonio Avenue, environmental considerations, proposed community park
and the Green Corridor and Green Neighborhood recommendations.    
Mr. Jansen proceeded with slides outlining community outreach, a community workshop held
on January 24 allowing the public to contribute to the urban design process, an open house
held on February 24 encouraging further community feedback and feedback received. 
Council Member Burt commented on ways that the corridor would be a benefit to the
community.   
City Manager Shikada asked Director Lait to comment on the special setback in place on San
Antonio Road. 
Director Lait said if the City were interested in expanding the right-of-way to include this special
setback area could be acquired if the City were to purchase that land. He noted the hotel
project where there are imposed conditions saying should the City need that space in the
future that a redesign would be required at their expense.  
Council Member Burt expressed his interest in whether they could not only require the setback
which means that the building was not built in a way that precluded putting an offroad path in
that area to one where they are granted easements as the condition of the approval of the
projects.   
City Manager Shikada noted that there are constraints on their ability to mandate requirements
such as an easement dedication in the absence of a nexus to the development.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/18/2024
Council Member Burt stated he was looking for them not being told that there are constraints
but to have a discussion on what those constraints are with an intention to achieve the
outcome they are seeking.   
Mr. Shikada countered that involves the development of a plan and the funding behind it.  
Council Member Veenker thought it was important to mention that the corridor is not
pedestrian friendly. She questioned why there are four lanes going away on the San Antonio
Road at San Antonio Avenue slide. 
Dave Amos joined to provide explanation for that issue.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked for their thoughts on the merit of having higher
buildings in sections one and three with the linear park in the middle inherently lower to
enhance its centrality and potential desirability as a gathering place and wanted more detail on
the linear park.    
Council Member Kou asked if there would be a coordinated area plan or just take projects as
they come.   
Director Lait answered that was his reference to the Staff working on a request for proposals
that will be made available in public so that consultants that would want to participate in the
process would have a chance to submit proposals that the City would review. They will select a
firm that would represent all of their interests articulated in the request for proposals and it will
be presented to City Council for review and taking action to initiate the process.  
Council Member Kou wanted to know how many projects is coming through besides the 788
one. 
Director Lait thought there were two other pending formal applications and one other SB 330
preliminary application.  
Council Member Kou asked if the allowed use of the sharrows on 788 San Antonio would
continue with all the other projects coming through.  
Director Lait replied projects that are in the pipeline now for review will be reviewed to the
City’s policies in place. There is no coordinated plan for right-of-way acquisition to build out a
dedicated cycle path.  
Council Member Kou commented the roads and right-of-way are important. She wants to see a
transportation study plan. She thought it would be necessary to evaluate whether there should
be parking on San Antonio since it is higher density. She wanted to be sure that as that area was
developed for the coordinated plan that some of these developments have more community
center space as well as courts for play areas and there is acknowledgment that that is a bird
corridor. She wanted to know if PABAC is involved in reviewing any of this coordination.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/18/2024
Director Lait stated as they begin work on the area plan, they will have a whole outreach and
engagement strategy to include all interested parties including PABAC.   
Mayor Stone questioned if they know about how many vehicle dwellers were identified along
San Antonio.  
Director Lait believed that data would be available going forward.  
Mayor Stone thought they would want to consider the compounding impact to the community
and potential
growth of the number of vehicle
dwellers
as they recognize
potential
displacement on San Antonio. He mentioned an upcoming discussion regarding El Camino bike
lanes that will similarly displace vehicle dwellers on April 1.  
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, noted that in the upcoming specific plan they will be
coordinating with planning on the transportation elements and that they have their Bicycle and
Pedestrian Transportation Plan update identifying projects in this area and will look toward
Council to potentially prioritize those as projects.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims wanted to keep in mind that there will be a lot of new
residents on their border with Mountain View as they work on this plan and there is an
attractive retail environment on Mountain View’s side of San Antonio. As a matter of economic
development, they have to be thinking about pivoting those residents toward grocery, dining, 
etc. in Palo Alto.    
Council Member Burt stated that this is a corridor they share with Mountain View. He thought
it was essential that their planning process work closely with Mountain View. He would like to
see Mountain View represented as a stakeholder entity but ideally it should be almost a joint
planning process.  
Public Comment: 
1. 
Liz G. ( Zoom) observed that residential overlays are problematic. The zone remains
commercial and these overlays leave out residents to City protected ordinances that
one-zoners enjoy. She brought up all the concrete poured, sound barrier walls and
earthen septic tanks. She asked if the design and plan for the interior of the units would
be amenable for families. She wanted to support retail and economy in Palo Alto. She
found the distance from the train troubling.  
2. 
Penny E. ( Zoom) queried how they plan to treat the two-way cycle tracks at major
intersection like Middlefield. She expressed hope that the City would engage with
Mountain View. She did not see any evidence in the plans of any thought about bicycle
transportation or bus transit. She thought the special setback should be integrated in
the planning process and reflected in the drawings.    
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
3. 
Natalie G. ( Zoom) echoed the concerns about transit. She saw this as a wonderful
stepping stone to the next phase of planning.   
Consent Calendar
Council Member Burt registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 10. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 7, 8, 10. 
Council Member Veenker registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 10. 
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to
approve Agenda Item Numbers 5-11. 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 5, 6, 9, 11:  7-0
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 7, 8:  6-1, Tanaka no
MOTION PASSED ITEM 10:  4-3, Burt, Tanaka, Veenker no
Public Comment: 
1. 
Herb B. ( Item 8) believed this should be removed from consent and rejected because
instead of being a contract based on a request from the City to provide the services the
City is required to provide by state law, it looks like the City is responding to requests for
proposal from Pets in Need to meet their services. He also mentioned that Pets in
Need’s annual report that was due six months ago has not yet been filed according to
the Attorney General’ s Registration for Charities and Fundraisers
2. 
Kadri C. ( Item 8) talked about the contract terms between Pets in Need and the City of
Palo Alto. She described multiple issues with the scope of services that have not been
discussed prior and are now added to the contract with no discretions with Council
Members or Animal Control. She felt these contract adjustments are necessary to
ensure a good-natured working relationship between Pets in Need and the City of Palo
Alto.   
3. 
Jeannette W. (Item 8) was saddened by the contract with Pets in Need. She felt the
animal services have not gone well since the takeover and they have not been held
accountable for the lack of services. She stated they need to bring back the five days a
week spay and neuter, provide care for animals 24 hours a day and work with cruelty
investigations. She asked Council to consider the alternative of an in-house shelter.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
4. 
Kim S. ( Item 8)  
5. 
Liz G. (Zoom) ( Item 9) commented that residential overlays do not change commercial
zones. She expressed a need to build more housing but the development of this type of
housing is contracted with private companies with 50-year leases. They lack oversight. 
They are not a good way to secure affordable housing for families. She discussed the
Mayfield Place part of the Mayfield Agreement as an example. She suggested working
with the county and local housing organizations would provide equitable, inclusive
housing for all in Palo Alto.  
6. 
Aram J. ( Zoom) discussed his opposition to the Shikada plan to privatize the animal
shelter. He opined that the City Manager overloads the calendar so people get tired and
the Mayor feels compelled to reduce public speaking time. He thought many issues
need to be resolved before giving a five-year contract to Pets in Needs.  
Council Member Burt voted no for procedural reasons and some related aspects. He stated
there was a need to go forward with the renewal of the project to enable an affordable housing
project to be able to take advantage of this program and extend it for that purpose but he
found that the report did not provide the context for what that means. When this was first
adopted, it was put in place a major stepdown of the feed in tariff rate that would occur after
the first three megawatts which the upcoming project would fulfill. That lower rate kills any
interest in the program. What they have going on right now is their reliability and resiliency
plan which will include the role of local distributed generation and storage issues like solar
programs. They are going to want programs that will be not only solar but solar plus storage. He
thinks the programs need to be revamped but they are killing this program after the next
project. There are opportunities for solar within the City. He noted that his understanding is
that C40 cities have a high percentage of their renewables to be generated in the City. He
thought they should have a review of their existing and past solar programs come to the SCAP
Ad-Hoc before they get the reliability and resiliency plan.    
Council Member Tanaka said he supports the idea of having EV ports at a bunch of sites in Palo
Alto but he does not see how they will get them in the targeted time. On Item 8, he described
contractual issues that he believes need to be resolved. Regarding Item 10, he liked the idea
but agreed that it was a poorly written report.   
Council Member Veenker voted no on Item 10 because she did not feel she had enough
information and notice to vote yes. She liked the idea of extending a deadline to facilitate an
affordable housing project but she wanted more context and notice.   
5. 
Approval of Minutes from March 4, 2024 meeting
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
6. 
Adoption of a Resolution Approving an Edison Electric Institute Master Power Purchase
and Sale Agreement With Silicon Valley Clean Energy Authority and Delegating Authority
to the City Manager to Transact Under the Master Agreement for Electricity-Related
Commodities
and Services
CEQA
Status: Not a project
under
CEQA Guidelines
15378(b)(5) 
7. 
Approval of Amendment
No. 2 of C19171513
With CLEAResult
Consulting, Inc. 
CLEAResult) Extending the Contract Expiration Date by Three Years From April 16, 2024
to April 15, 2027. CEQA Status - Not a Project. 
8. 
Approval of a Professional Services Agreement ( Contract No. C24190819) Between the
City of Palo Alto and Pets in Need for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $7,373,516 for a
Five-year Term; and Amend the FY2024 Budget in the General Fund; CEQA status – 
categorically exempt. 
9. 
Adoption of a Resolution Authorizing Use of the City’s Activity ( 1) Permanent Local
Housing Allocation ( PLHA) 2019, 2020, and 2021 Allocations for Predevelopment
Activities, Construction, and/ or Permanent Financing of New Affordable Housing at the
Matadero Creek Affordable Housing Site, and Approve FY 2024 Budget Amendments in
the Permanent Local Housing Allocation Fund; CEQA Status – not a project. 
10. 
Approval of Amended Palo Alto CLEAN Program Rules and Requirements, Handbook, 
and Power Purchase Agreement; CEQA Status: Not a Project under CEQA Guidelines
Sections 15378(a) and (b) 
11. 
SECOND READING: Adopt a Park Dedication Ordinance for the Tower Well site, 0.19
acres of land (8,437 square feet) at 201 Alma Street and approve the proposed name
Tower Well Park” as Recommended by the Parks and Recreation Commission. CEQA
status - not a project. (FIRST READING: March 4, 2024 PASSED 7-0) 
City Manager Comments
City Manager Shikada spoke about the State of the City Address and Event, grade separation
upcoming discussions, Caltrans proposal to add bike lanes on El Camino Real, upcoming
community events, Artlift Microgrants: Utility Box Murals and notable tentative upcoming
Council items.   
Action Items
12. 
SECOND READING: Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Amending Chapter
8.04 ( Street, Trees, Shrubs, and Plants) and Chapter 8.10 ( Tree Preservation and
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
Management Regulations) ( FIRST READING: January 16, 2024 PASSED 5-2, Lythcott-
Haims, Tanaka no) Item Removed Off Agenda
13. 
Discussion and Direction Regarding the City Council Procedures and Protocols Handbook
Annual Discussion
as Recommended
by the Policy & 
Services Committee Item
Removed Off Agenda
AA1. 
Approval of the 2024 City Council Priority Objectives and Finance Committee and Policy
Services Committee Workplans ( Item Continued from March 4, 2024 and March 11, 
2024 City Council Meeting) New Item added
Vice Mayor Lauing wanted clarification on Items 29 and 30.  
Brad Eggleston, Public Works Director clarified that one of those was a City-wide EV strategic
plan that council recently approved a consultant contract for looking at the whole community
charging needs and other types of impacts. The other one is developing a plan for electrifying
and providing charging capacity for the internal City fleet.  
Vice Mayor Lauing asked if that would be different than what they are doing now. 
Mr. Eggleston said thus far it has been done on an ad-hoc basis over last year’s budget season
and what they are currently going through. They are trying to get more organized. He looked at
that as a five-year or longer plan. 
Vice Mayor Lauing said adding city-wide to the wording made it clearer.  
Council Member Veenker added that the Climate Protection Ad-Hoc reviewed these objectives
with Director Eggleston and others. She commented that this is packed and there is still more
they want to do so it is all about prioritizing the work.    
Council Member Burt reference the 65,000 smart meters mentioned on Item 21 asking if that is
65,000 electrical and commented on the timeline being faster than he expected.  
Dean Batchelor, Utility Director, answered that 65 represents all three utilities for all the
residential customers. They are at 35 percent. They have been tracking for the last three weeks
but are actually installing 1000 meters a week. He felt confident they will have the residential
area up and running with all electric, gas and water.  
Council Member Burt wanted to see as part of that implementation is the data they are going
to use and for what purpose. On Item 30, he wanted to see the City e-bike fleet explicitly
added. He was glad to see parking policy under the climate program because cars driving
around for a parking space has a needless contribution to GHGs. He would like those smart
programs to be embraced. Under 37, he wanted to be sure that everybody has on their radar
that in terms of a paved area that is a candidate for solar programs and that there is a
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
consortium of companies involved in full sustainability and electrification of municipal airports
and they have identified their municipal airport for a variety of reasons as their top candidate
for a really green airport. Under natural environment, he did not see an upcoming update to
the Wildland Protection Plan.  
City Manager Shikada did not recall the specifics and they would get back to him about that.    
Council Member Kou commented that on Item 37, in order to be green and be addressing
climate change, the fuel tanks would need to all be unleaded to fit into that SCAP. She wanted
to know why commercial dewatering requirements were dropped as part of climate change.   
Mr. Eggleston said that the unleaded fuel at the airport was on Item 94. Regarding commercial
building dewatering, much more stringent standards had been set several years ago that
encourage people to put in these cutoff walls that essentially block the flow of brown water
and dramatically reduce the amount of brown water that has to be pumped or they have to go
through more stringent requirements to justify not using that kind of system. That has been
successful and they have not had enough projects come through that process yet to evaluate
and identify the need for further changes.  
Council Member Kou asked if they have the tree canopy as part of the infrastructure.   
Mr. Eggleston answered there is no Council priority objective for that but they do have SCAP
goals under the natural environment for a higher target of canopy coverage and other goals in
the budget for adding trees every year.   
Council Member Tanaka queried which item covers the scooter program that was unanimously
approved about four years ago.  
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, stated micromobility or scooter and bikeshare is
included both as a component along with other SCAP projects they currently have planned for a
planner they attempted to hire to work on last year but were unsuccessful in. They will be going
out again to try and hire for that position. They hope to get started on it this year. He noted
that one of the larger providers of scooter and bikes in the country has gone bankrupt.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to know the plan for widening Charleston Bridge.  
City Manager Shikada answered that was covered under Community Health and Safety and it
will be in an upcoming section.   
Mr. Eggleston said it is under Climate Change Adaptation Flood Protection, Item 40. 
Council Member Tanaka expressed need to advocate pushing this forward.  
Mr. Eggleston added that because of the new hydrological information that came from the
December 31 flood, the JPA is working on bringing a consultant to do a re-evaluation of the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
possibilities for those projects. They are not in a place to currently push forward with that
project. They are looking at alternatives and how it can fit in.   
Vice Mayor Lauing discussed his understanding of NOFA and felt they need to add to that fund, 
should be deciding what the criteria are and be looking at reserves in that fund. He would like
to suggest the wording to state evaluate NOFA policy and consider criteria for funding.  
Director Lait stated they have been working on preparing a notice of funding availability for
release. They do not have a lot of funds. They have a number of agencies seeking funds. There
is question of how to distribute and support different groups with their limited resources. He
thought the language was fine. They could explore evaluating the policy and making changes.  
City Manager Shikada thought it sounded like a criteria discussion and should be approved by
Council and they would gear toward that.  
Vice Mayor Lauing stated the issue that needs to be addressed now is raising money for
affordable housing and he thought they should be specific about that. His suggestion is to add
evaluating sources and methods for raising significant funding to support affordable housing
and develop potential programs that appeal to them.  
Director Lait commented that is part of their work program. The Housing Ad-Hoc has that as
one of its charges to explore different options. Staff is working on information to present to the
Mayor and Vice Mayor as representatives of the Housing Ad-Hoc. They will note that work on
the chart.  
Vice Mayor Lauing pointed out Items 58 through 62 that are referred to as housing element
implementation. He thought 61 seemed repetitive.  
Director Lait stated the other references are specific to the actions being taken. There is a list of
other one-off actions that need to be taken to amend the local zoning to comply with state law. 
It will be an omnibus of code changes that are wrapped up into one discreet effort. 
Council Member Kou referenced a colleague’ s memo on short-term rentals. She wanted to
know if that could be added back to the objectives.      
City Manager Shikada commented this has been an issue that has been rolled forward over the
course of a couple of years.  
Director Lait answered the colleague’ s memo is not identified on the current workplan as an
assignment they will take on in this objectives year. That will be a new body of work they will
need to allocate resources for.  
City Manager Shikada said it would require removal of something else to be prioritized.  
Mayor Kou read somewhere that it was going to be a consideration of the FY24 budget. She
wondered if the colleague’ s memo was just being ignored. She hoped her colleagues will
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
consider putting that back on. On Item 62, she asked if Housing Element Program 3.9 is related
to converting commercial floor area to residential.  
Director Lait clarified this is a policy that reduces commercial floor area allowances or other
commercial incentives at strategic locations to shift the economic incentive toward housing
production and away from office.   
Council Member Kou referenced the Palo Alto Redwoods Condo Complex. Council had
unanimously approved looking into protections for residentially zoned properties throughout
the City. Their attorney requested specific text amendments that have provided. She asked if
that is on this schedule.  
Director Lait said Kristi Bascom was the representative for the Palo Alto Redwoods. That is
presented as a property specific text amendment. City Council did give direction to follow up on
that. It is not on the current list. It is a new body of work and they need to identify resources to
take that on.   
Council Member Kou stated this is another item the Council voted to proceed forward on
examining it. She hoped that Council would consider putting it on the list or referring it to the
Housing Ad-Hoc Committee.  
Council Member Burt hopes to have short-term rentals on the calendar year 25 agenda. He
hoped to see an update on the gap analysis on housing and services for the unhoused before
the end of the year. He asked if Item 66 is only related to vehicle dwellers and the need for safe
parking.  
Melissa McDonough, Assistant to the City Manager, clarified the original proposal from the
previous year talked about a strategy to better connect the unhoused with housing. There are a
lot of things already within the county’s strategic plan that they are partners with developing. In
terms of the gap analysis, this is a good idea of what they are doing, what the county is doing
and what they can be doing better within their span of control. In terms of Geng Road, that
came out of Council direction from the Safe Parking Permanent Ordinance conversation in
December. Two pieces came out of that direction that will take some substantial leg work from
Staff and that is both looking at the question of expanding safe parking at Geng Road and then
Council had an interest of understanding their unhoused population. It was her recollection
that the interest was broader than just in vehicles.    
Council Member Burt thought that a more comprehensive and strategic understanding of this
was needed to include the roles of the county. He wanted to see the gap analysis and a clearer
summary of the county initiatives. He wanted a better grasp of how well the affordable housing
providers are performing their services. He would like their office to have a role in reviewing
any performance issues with affordable housing providers.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims concurred with Council Member Kou in asking that they figure
out how to get Palo Alto Redwood started.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
Council Member Kou requested adding exploring the amendment from the proposal of the Palo
Alto Redwoods HOA for zoning code text changes and short-term rentals. 
Vice Mayor Lauing thought it was fair but that it could not be fit in this year. 
Council Member Burt thought they wanted to make sure some things they want to see on the
2025 list are delineated on a follow-up list, including the Redwoods project and short-term
rentals. He asked Staff if they could get that codified.  
City Manager Shikada agreed to figure out how to do that to keep it on the plate.  
Council Member Burt requested a mechanism to review performance complaints on existing
affordable housing projects.  
City Manager Shikada shared that is an issue of ongoing discussion among Staff as to how that
can be done. It is currently handled through the Office of Human Services and Community
Services Department. As they look at scaling up the low-market residential units around town, 
the City’s role in landlord-tenant issues is a big question. He thought they would bring forward
some thoughts on how to address that issue without specific recommendation as a part of the
upcoming budget process because this could be a very significant resource allocation. 
Council Member Kou stated they have contracts of their own for City’s below-market rate and
asked how they oversee those complaints.  
Director Lait answered when they get a complaint, they reach out to Alta Housing to share what
they are hearing and understand more about the condition or complaint being made. They
have been hampered with their efforts because they lost their housing planner to another city
several months ago. They are bringing somebody onboard in the next week so they will be able
to shore up their local support for the BMR program and be able to respond to those
complaints more effectively.  
City Manager Shikada added that in addition to the planner involvement in reviewing the
circumstances with Alta and the resident or perspective resident, under other circumstances
there has been Code Enforcement go visit units where there have been issues of concern raised
with the condition of units. That is another dimension of the City’s involvement in addition to
the services provided through the Community Services Department Office of Human Services. 
The issue they want to discuss with Council more broadly is how they handle this if there is a
prospect not only of increase in inventory of below-market but on a topic such as the rental
registry.  
Council Member Kou queried if the Matadero Creek affordable housing would be a contract
through the City. 
Director Lait said it is yet to be determined how that gets developed but he imagined that to be
a scenario where the City would engage Alta Housing or some agency to oversee that.              
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
MOTION:  Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Lauing to approve the
2024 Proposed City Council Priorities and Objectives: Climate Change & Natural Environment
section. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to approve the 2024
Proposed City Council Priorities and Objectives: Housing for Social and Economic Balance
section and additional changes/ additions: 
1. Revise NOFA to read: “ Conduct a policy review with criteria for Notice of Funding
Availability (NOFA)”; and, 
2. Add the evaluation of sources and methods for raising significant funding to support
affordable housing. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
Agenda Item AA1 to be continued to a City Council Meeting Date uncertain. 
AA2. 
Policy and Services Recommendation to the City Council for the creation of a Citizens
Advisory
Committee
on
a
Potential
Charter
Amendment
on
Council
Member
Compensation ( Item Continued from March 11, 2024 City Council Meeting) 
Agenda Item AA2 not heard and to be deferred to a City Council Meeting date uncertain. 
Mayor Stone announced they will start at 5:30 March 25 on AA1 and AA2.  
Closed Session
AA3. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY- EXISTING LITIGATION Subject: Hamilton and High, 
LLC, The Keenan Family Trust, et al. v. City of Palo Alto, et al. Santa Clara County
Superior
Court
Case
No. 20CV366967
Authority: 
Government
Code
Section
54956.9(d)(1) New Item added
3. 
CONFERENCE
WITH
REAL
PROPERTY
NEGOTIATORS
Authority: Government
Code
Section 54956.8 Property: 4000 Middlefield Road, Palo Alto (Informally known as the
Cubberley Site) Negotiating Party: Palo Alto Unified School District City Negotiators: ( Ed
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 18
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 18/2024
Shikada, Chantal Cotton Gaines, Kristen O'Kane, Sunny Tong) Subject of Negotiations: 
Purchase, Exchange, and/ or Lease Price and Terms of Payment Agenda Item Reordered
Public Comment:  
1. 
Aram J. ( Zoom) opined that the closed sessions were a disservice to the public. He
disagreed with having these kinds of critical issues with public input put into closed
sessions. He asked that the closed sessions be ended as much as possible.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Veenker to go into Closed
Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
Council went into Closed Session at 10:40 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 11:29 P.M. 
Mayor Stone announced no reportable action. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:30 P.M. 
