CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 18 
 Special Meeting 
 
April 22, 2024 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker 
Present Remotely:  
Absent: 
 
 
Lauing 
CALL TO ORDER 
Mayor Stone called the meeting to order. 
 
SPECIAL ORDERS OF THE DAY 
1. 
Recognizing Youth Living in Palo Alto or Enrolled at PAUSD Who Have 
Received The President's Volunteer Service Award (PVSA) As Certified 
by Youth Community Service (YCS) This Academic Year Between July 
1, 2023 – Feb 15, 2024. 
Mora Oommen, Executive Director Youth Community Services, was excited 
to recognize students in the community who have received the President's 
Volunteer Service Award. She described the history and impact of YCS and 
what the PVSA is and who can apply. There were 75 students in middle and 
high school recognized by President Biden, having dedicated over 11,750 
hours of service to 152 community organizations. She presented slides of 
some of the participants, thanking them. 
Emma, PVSA Silver Level Award Winner, described that she volunteered 
about 180 hours. She discussed participating in the YCS Summer of Service 
Program to plan their National Day of Service event, working at Walter 
Hayes Summer School with a class of second-graders, and participating in 
several robotics events over the summer.  
Jabron, PVSA Award Winner, noted that participating in community service 
has been incredibly rewarding. He explained that one of the activities he 
participated in over the summer was to go on a global leadership camp to a 
school in Kenya to teach students with disabilities.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
Jack Miller, Silicon Valley Bicycle Exchange, stated he had the pleasure of 
hosting students from Palo Alto high schools and congratulated all the 
students who won awards. He felt these programs provided experiences the 
students do not get in high school and explained how the program also 
benefited Silicon Valley Bicycle Exchange.  
Monica S., Marine Mammal Center, spoke about the organization and the 
activities volunteers participate in, including feeding and caring for animals, 
mentoring other students, and educating the public. She gave information 
on how to volunteer.  
Mayor Stone congratulated the students who participated and won this 
award. He stated the award was a testament to selflessness, compassion, 
and willingness to give back to the community.  
Council Member Kou congratulated the students and was interested in 
hearing more about what all of the students did.  
NO ACTION 
 
CLOSED SESSION 
2. 
CONFERENCE 
WITH 
LABOR 
NEGOTIATORS 
City 
Designated 
Representatives: City Manager and his Designees Pursuant to Merit 
System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada, Kiely Nose, Sandra Blanch, 
Nick Raisch, Tori Post, Molly Stump, and Jennifer Fine) Employee 
Organization: Service Employees International Union, (SEIU) Local 
521, Utilities Management and Professional Association of Palo Alto 
(UMPAPA), Palo Alto Peace Officers’ Association (PAPOA), Palo Alto 
Police Management Association (PMA), International Association of Fire 
Fighters (IAFF) local 1319, Palo Alto Fire Chiefs’ Association (FCA); 
Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6 (a) 
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member 
Veenker, to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Lauing absent 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:50 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:45 P.M. 
Mayor Stone announced no reportable action. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
 
AGENDA CHANGES, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, stated there were no changes to the agenda. He 
noted Staff issued a supplemental report on Item 10 on the Consent agenda, 
available online. 
 
PUBLIC COMMENT 
 
Mayor Stone reviewed the expectations for public comment.  
1. 
Yazan spoke on behalf of Michelle H., Uzma M., Fariha H., Lubna Q., and 
Tuba S. He shared a recent personal experience in which a woman 
shouted at him and his young daughter, calling them terrorists and 
blaming them for the actions of Palestinians in Gaza. He stated what is 
happening in Gaza is also a local issue. He believed that not calling for 
an end to the conflict was divisive.  
2. 
Talha spoke on behalf of Yasa B., Hadi S., Moiez B., Taha A., and Humza 
S. He described his experience in organizing and participating in recent 
protests and felt a double standard was applied to the protestors. He 
stated his movement is against the taking of hostages and the deaths of 
Israelis and Palestinians alike and that it was false to conflate being pro-
Palestinian with being pro-terrorism or anti-Semitic. He asked for the 
Council to call for an end of this violence.  
3. 
Julia Z. spoke on behalf of Caitlin H., Nrieka I, Deven S., Floyd N., and 
Susan C., members of the Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition, 
representing three of the major high schools in Palo Alto. She described 
a recent climate justice rally. She urged the Council to recommit to 
climate this Earth Day, moving with greater urgency, intensity, and 
dedication to sustainability. She listed three major concerns the PASCC 
members continue to hear and presented recommendations to achieve 
climate goals.  
4. 
Phoebe M., adding to the previous speaker's presentation, noted that 
through One Margin implementation and an end-of-life mandate closely 
vetted by the City's legal team, the City can get closer to achieving 80 
by 30 and reclaim its place at the forefront of sustainability as a 
trailblazer of climate progress.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
5. 
Hamilton H. requested that City Council not unnecessarily abbreviate 
the duration of public comment for agenda action items.  
6. 
Noel S. noted that East Palo Alto passed a ceasefire resolution and 
believed the residents there understood what the Palestinians were 
going through. He asked for a ceasefire resolution.  
7. 
Deborah G. thanked the Council for the police presence at the recent 
rally. She stated that the war in the Middle East is all about oil and 
would like to see a resolution that everyone rides their bikes, which 
would also mitigate climate change.  
8. 
Deborahlise stated the planet's warming emissions generated during the 
first 60 days of the bombing of Gaza were greater than the annual 
carbon footprint of more than 20 nations. She asked for a ceasefire 
resolution.  
9. 
Aram J. (Zoom) felt that calling pro-Palestinian supporters anti-Semitic 
was censorship and should not continue.  
10. Nicole C.-W. (Zoom), Executive Director of Dreamcatchers, was grateful 
for the volunteers and YCS's support. She praised YCS for making 
volunteering less about completing hours and more about learning and 
the way to serve the community.  
11. Elaine E. (Zoom) stated it was not too late for Palo Alto's voice to be 
heard in condemning government funding in the destruction in Gaza.  
Mayor Stone clarified that given the volume of recent public speakers, 10 or 
fewer speakers are given 3 minutes; 10 to 20 speakers, 2 minutes; and 
above 20, 1 minute.  
 
COUNCIL MEMBER QUESTIONS, COMMENTS AND ANNOUNCEMENTS 
Council Member Veenker explained that she was traveling on behalf of the 
City last week. She was in Washington, DC, for the Northern California 
Power Agency, jointly held with the Northwest Public Power Association. 
There were presentations on various issues affecting power supply, including 
cyber security threats to the grid, and there were also meetings at Capitol 
Hill. She then went to Sacramento for the League of California Cities City 
Leader Summit with conference sessions on housing, governance, and more.  
Council Member Kou noted that the Palo Alto Youth Council held their 
Inaugural Civic Impact Summit on Saturday with very interesting speakers. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
She also stated that SB 9 had been struck down, which was a win for charter 
cities.  
 
STUDY SESSION 
3. 
Race and Equity Update: Assessment Report from Ivy Planning Group 
on City Workplace Culture and 2024-2025 (Calendar Years) Equity 
Action Plan 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, explained this was the product of a several-
month effort following up on prior Council direction related to race and 
equity as a Council priority.  
Chantal Cotton Gaines, Deputy City Manager, provided an overview of this 
topic and of Ivy Planning Group. She read the City's Equity Mission 
Statement 
Janet Smith, Co-founder & President Ivy Planning Group, gave further 
background on Ivy Planning Group. She then discussed the assessment that 
was done, including the objectives and the assessment methods. There were 
five key themes identified, each of which she discussed in depth. Those 
themes were the City of Palo Also has some infrastructure in place that can 
enable Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Belonging (DEIB) success; 
employees often feel they are treated poorly by the public and would like 
more support to navigate difficult interactions; the City is missing a 
structured approach to DEIB; some people processes encourage while others 
inhibit the advancement of DEIB; and the lack of follow-through and the 
history of exclusionary practices has made people question the City's 
dedication to DEIB. Using those themes, the consultants built a draft DEIB 
blueprint with four key goals: DEIB infrastructure, workforce, workplace, and 
community. She highlighted actions to take in each of those four areas.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton Gaines noted that Staff developed three 
categories to be carried year over year as broader themes within Palo Alto's 
DEIB work, cultivating experiences and appreciation, fostering an inclusive 
environment, and applying an equity lens, all with a focus on people, 
purpose, and practice. She further reviewed the Equity Action Plan in each 
category, all included in the meeting packet.  
Council Member Veenker stated she enjoyed the interview she had during 
this process as it forced her to think through these issues more deeply. 
Noting that participation was voluntary and there was only 29% 
participation, she questioned how that might have skewed the results and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
why that happened. She described that one thing done at the January 
retreat was to change the Council's priority Community Health and Safety to 
Community Health, Safety, Wellness, and Belonging. She hoped that was a 
step in the right direction along with the plan outlined. She also commented 
on the importance of mentoring as a link between equitable hiring and 
promotion.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton Gaines explained the focus groups were done at 
the end of July last year, which was a difficult time of year and impacted the 
ability of Staff to participate.  
Ms. Smith felt the study had balanced perspectives with multiple voices. She 
felt communication was important to make changes so that people 
understand it really matters. It is critical to allocate resources around this 
matter, and once the action plan is laid out, anything that supports 
accountability is important.  
Gary Smith, Co-Founder of Ivy Planning Group, agreed that mentoring was 
one aspect of ensuring the entire employee life cycle is performing the best 
it can.  
Mayor Stone asked if the responses of the various participants were similar 
across different job classifications. He noted the uniform grievance that staff 
members felt mistreated by the public was disturbing and wondered if it was 
a more systemic issue. He liked the recommendation to include DEIB 
performance metrics in employee evaluations and asked if that has worked 
in other cities.  
Ms. Smith responded there were similarities in the themes and that Staff 
who were more public facing had stories about what it felt like to be a city 
employee. Employees at the lowest levels or younger employees cared more 
about being developed. Demographics drove some of the variants, and some 
job functions were disproportionally one demographic more than another. 
She noted not everyone felt they were being mistreated, but it was more 
than you would want. Mistreatment was primarily talked about as from the 
community, not peer-to-peer or from bosses. She explained the DEIB 
performance metrics work when there is a culture of accountability. 
Council 
Member 
Lythcott-Haims 
asked 
if 
there 
were 
specific 
recommendations for the campaign design to increase public awareness of 
Staff. She asked how Palo Alto is doing compared to other clients or 
employers and whether there was anything either novel or concerning. She 
noted the focus groups were described around race, gender, and tenure and 
questioned how to get at the root of more subtle distinctions around class, 
education, and perceived worth stemming from one's job. She also 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
mentioned LGBTQ and disabled individuals had to self identify in the focus 
groups and wondered how the other characteristics were not considered self 
identified. She pointed out that if any members of the Staff were interested 
in having a Pride event, she was interested in that conversation.  
Mr. Smith explained that a big part of it is creating a sense of connection. 
People treat people differently when they feel connected to them. He felt 
that if this study were repeated today, the participation rate would be 
different as people see that the City is still committed to this idea.  
Ms. Smith noted that Palo Alto's location makes the City different. The 
socioeconomic differences of residents and Staff cause questions of 
belonging. The Council and City continuing to engage around and speak for 
DEIB will demonstrate its importance. 
Deputy City Manager Cotton Gaines noted the information on Staff regarding 
race, tenure, and gender is held within an employee's file, but LGBTQ and 
disability status are not. Those options had to be self selected.  
Council 
Member 
Kou 
asked 
if 
the 
City 
included 
employees 
with 
developmental disabilities. She felt that was another group to include. 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
1. 
Aram J. (Zoom) wanted to know the cost of the Ivy Planning Group 
consultation. He was offended that the police department claimed not 
to be appreciated, as he believed the department had a history of 
racism. He wondered if the citizens were asked how they felt about 
law enforcement.  
2. 
Elizabeth G. (Zoom) underscored that housing was critical to feeling 
included and feeling like there is equal access. She felt housing and 
the wage component were missing from this discussion.  
3. 
Winter D. (Zoom) was unsure how to make the analysis and 
suggestions concrete. She was glad the review was done. She felt 
things were going in the right direction after the Independent Police 
Auditor's report, partly thanks to the cooperation, new leadership, 
and new policies of the Palo Alto Police Department.  
NO ACTION 
 
CONSENT CALENDAR 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
4. 
Approval of Minutes from April 1, 2024, and April 8, 2024, Meetings 
5. 
CONSENT: 261 Hamilton Ave: Upgrade Historic Inventory from 
Category 3 to Category 1 
6. 
Adopt a Resolution Authorizing the City Manager or Their Designee to 
Execute an Amendment to the Power Purchase Agreement with 
Ameresco Half Moon Bay LLC for the Purchase of up to 60,000 
Megawatt-Hours per Year of Biogas Energy Over a Term of up to 20 
Years for a Total Not to Exceed Amount of $147.2 Million; CEQA 
Status: Not a Project under CEQA Guidelines Section 15378(a) 
7. 
Approval of Construction Contract Number C24190641A with Valhalla 
Builders, Inc. in the Amount of $460,900 and Authorization for the City 
Manager or Their Designee to Negotiate and Execute Change Orders 
for Related Additional but Unforeseen Work that may Develop During 
the Project up to a Not-to- Exceed Amount of $46,090 for the 
Performing Arts Venues Seat Replacement Project at Lucie Stern 
Community Theatre, Capital Improvement Program Project AC-18000; 
CEQA Status – Exempt Under CEQA Guidelines Section 15301 
8. 
Approval of Professional Services Contract No. C24190042 With BKF 
Engineers in a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount for $283,250 for Land 
Surveying Services for One Year; CEQA – Not a Project. 
9. 
Approval of a Five-Year Technical Assistance Agreement with the 
United States Geological Survey in an Amount Not-to-Exceed 
$924,745 for Scientific Monitoring Services at the Regional Water 
Quality Control Plant Outfall and Horizontal Levee Pilot Project Site 
(WQ-22001); CEQA Status- Categorically Exempt Section 15306 
10. 
QUASI-JUDICIAL. 739 Sutter Avenue [22PLN-00201 and 24PLN-
00005]: Appeal of the Director's Decision to Approve a Streamlined 
Housing Development Review Application to Allow Deconstruction of 
An Existing 8 Unit Residential Rental Development and Construction of 
12 Three-Bedroom Condominium Units. The Project Also Includes a 
Request for Approval of a Vesting Tentative Map for a Condominium 
Subdivision. Zoning District: RM-20. Environmental Assessment: 
Exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act per CEQA 
Guidelines Section 15332. For more information contact the Project 
Planner at HYPERLINK "mailto:Claire.Raybould@Cityofpaloalto.org" \h 
Claire.Raybould@Cityofpaloalto.org. 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
1. 
Carolyn G. of the San Carlos Court Neighborhood Association, asked 
to pull Item 10 from the Consent Calendar due to Palo Alto Municipal 
Code violations by the 739 Sutter Project: inadequate landscape 
screening, unfair parking privileges, and inadequately spaced trash 
carts. 
2. 
Richard W., resident of San Carlos Court, requested to withdraw Item 
10 from the Consent Calendar. He asked that the trees in the plan be 
tall enough to protect the privacy and safety of the neighborhood and 
to bring this plan to code.  
3. 
Jeff L. also asked to pull Item 10 from Consent. Palo Alto objective 
design standards were created to guide new developments that could 
be legally enforced, one of which mandates protective planting 
screenings between a new project and existing residential ones. The 
739 Sutter project does meet even these minimal standards and 
allowing this would create a precedent in which this privacy standard 
and perhaps others may not be enforced in future projects.  
4. 
Elizabeth G. (Zoom) commented that Item 10 would provide 4 
additional condominiums for sale but was taking 8 rental units off the 
market when rental housing is desperately needed. She noted the 
objective standards are applied more to building rental housing and 
are more relaxed with housing for sale. She asked to consider pulling 
this item to discuss inclusionary and equitable housing more fully.  
5. 
Kristen V.-F. (Zoom), speaking on behalf of Ellsworth Place residents, 
asked that Item 10 be removed from Consent because the rear 
property line screening does not follow the City's municipal code and 
the trash collection plan depends on restricting public parking along 
Sutter to accommodate 36 trashcans rather than using shared 
containers to preserve parking.  
6. 
Alan L. (Zoom) spoke in support of Item 10. He believed these 
condos would be perfect new starter homes for young people like 
himself who are getting priced out of almost every part of Palo Alto. 
He felt the City should be supporting development of new housing. 
7. 
Milan S., representing a group of residents on Sutter Avenue, also 
wanted Item 10 removed. He felt the planning process bypassed 
community engagement and desired a reevaluation of the process to 
ensure it was inclusive and reflective of the residents' voices. He 
believed that preserving the identify of the neighborhood should be 
taken seriously.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
8. 
David W. reiterated the other neighbors' concerns. He felt there was 
a lack of transparency and that the concerns were not addressed. He 
believed the project was a huge fire hazard and a traffic hazard and 
that there should be more study done before approving it.  
MOTION: Council Member Lythcott-Haims moved, seconded by Mayor 
Stone, to approve Agenda Item Numbers 4-10. 
Council Member Kou and Council Member Burt requested to Pull Agenda 
Item Number 10. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 6. 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 10. 
Council Member Burt registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 10. 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 4-5, 7-9: 6-0-1, Lauing absent 
MOTION PASSED ITEM 6: 5-1-1, Tanaka no, Lauing absent 
MOTION PASSED ITEM 10: 4-2-1, Kou no, Burt no, Lauing absent 
Council Member Kou stated there are currently affordable rental units at the 
site, which is what is needed for the housing affordability crisis. She felt it 
was egregious to have 36 trash bins taking away parking space. She noted if 
screening and privacy was part of the objective design guidelines, there 
should not be benches in places where there is no screening. She believed 
that the residents were not being heard and that it was a problem to talk 
about DEIB and then do something different.  
Council Member Tanaka noted that Item 6 was $147M to buy very expensive 
energy over a long term of 20 years in a time when people are struggling. 
He felt there were other alternatives and also stated it was unclear as to 
whether there was a minimum amount required each year.  
Council Member Burt supported the project on Sutter but was concerned 
about the issues raised on the objective standards.  
 
CITY MANAGER COMMENTS  
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, noted that Staff had issued a supplemental memo 
on Item 10 that addressed a number of the issues raised in public comment. 
He explained the City has designated use of the Civic Center Plaza as a site 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
for political demonstrations except when conflicting with civic and 
governmental uses, being mindful of the responsibility to ensure public 
safety and protect community members' First Amendment rights to peaceful 
demonstration. Staff reviewed the previous rally on March 30 and concluded 
that no charges were warranted. All reports on the additional rally yesterday 
were positive. He acknowledged the City has received a number of emails 
related to Palo Alto Airport. He noted that FAA guidelines and design criteria 
for the planning process require the airport consider runway changes, and 
ultimately it will come back to City Council for review and approval. He 
acknowledged Earth Day and the Earth Day Festival. He stated the City is in 
the process of posting additional updates regarding the Council's priorities. 
The Palo Alto libraries will be closed Wednesday, May 1, for staff 
development training, reopening on their next regularly scheduled day. He 
discussed the May Fete on May 4. He listed notable upcoming Council items, 
including a special transportation workshop next week with a BPTP update 
and discussion on rail grade separation.  
The Council took a five-minute break. 
 
ACTION ITEMS 
11. 
Review and provide input on Concept Plans for Quarry Road Transit 
Connection to the Palo Alto Transit Center and Adoption of a 
Resolution of Intention to Undedicate a portion of El Camino Park; 
CEQA status – statutorily exempt per Pub. Res. Code § 21080(b)(12). 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, discussed various agencies interested in this 
proposal and presented a map showing the project orientation. He described 
the alignment of the project with the Comprehensive Plan. He noted the El 
Camino Park is 10.75 acres of land leased by Stanford to the City and has 
been dedicated by the City for recreational and conservation purposes. The 
removal of that use requires a majority vote of the electorate, leading to this 
proposal.  
Lesley Low, Stanford Director of Transportation and Planning, reviewed the 
project need and concept plans. The proposed project would directly improve 
congestion and safety for all modes of transportation in this key regional 
gateway. Designs are in the very early stages, and all feasible options are 
under consideration. The preliminary concept design shows a full access 
intersection for transit and would require about ¼ acre of land within the El 
Camino Park. Voter approval would look to discontinue use of about 1/3 acre 
of land to allow a minor shift as plans are finalized with a 10-foot buffer 
around the concept design. Any land not ultimately utilized for the project 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
would later be rededicated by the City for park purposes. The project also 
includes multiple pedestrian and bicycle improvements within El Camino Park 
adjacent to the transit connection as well as in the intersection of Quarry 
Road at El Camino. There would be secondary benefits to the University 
Avenue and University Circle area by eliminating the need for some buses to 
make constrained turning movements in the corridor, reducing congestion, 
and reducing emissions and noise. There is an estimated 59% avoidance of 
University Circle and a reduction in run time by 5 to 8 minutes.  
City Manager Shikada noted it appears the project qualifies for CEQA 
exemption and thus an expedited review and approval could be done by City 
Council. He then reviewed the two-step process for undedication of park 
land. First is the Resolution of Intention before the Council this evening, and 
then on June 10, the Council would review any written protests and decide 
whether to place the measure on the ballot for the November election. He 
described several issues that will be resolved as the project proceeds and 
presented the Staff recommendation.  
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
1. 
Herb B. believed it was premature to vote on this Resolution of 
Intention as this is part of a larger project and the exemption 
therefore does not apply. He also felt the appropriate time to bring 
this to Council was when the design was finalized  
2. 
Navi D. of Caltrain expressed support for the resolution to undedicate 
a passive section of El Camino Park to enable significant transit and 
safety improvements. She explained this project would reduce 
congestion within University Circle and along University Avenue and 
enhance bicycle and pedestrian paths at the intersection of Quarry 
Road.  
3. 
Charlsie C. voiced support of this project on behalf of SamTrans. She 
noted more direct routing to El Camino and Quarry Road would allow 
time savings, creating a better experience for riders.  
4. 
Elizabeth G. (Zoom) felt this was a great concept idea with amazing 
connectivity, enhancing infrastructure prior to planned housing. She 
asked if Amtrak was involved with this.  
5. 
Elizabeth A. (Zoom) spoke on behalf of Friends of Caltrain to strongly 
support the Staff recommendation. She noted this project should be 
a two-way rather than one-way street, which would have a marginal 
additional impact to the park space with something close to twice the 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
benefit. She felt that even with the somewhat improved bike access, 
the bike and pedestrian access was still poor.  
6. 
Aram J. (Zoom) agreed that he would like the full plan to be 
complete before being asked to vote on it. He wanted to see if the 
same goals of less congestion and more bikes and pedestrian 
pathways could be accomplished without undedicating one inch of the 
park.  
7. 
Winter D. (Zoom) believed the need for park land would be critical 
given the amount of housing needed over the next eight years. She 
felt that with a good plan, this project could be done with no net loss 
of park land, perhaps with Stanford providing an equivalent amount 
of park land somewhere else in town.  
8. 
Eduardo H. (Zoom) stated he bikes to work through that area and 
navigating through that area is a little dangerous. He requested the 
Council to place the resolution on the ballot.  
9. 
Joshua G. (Zoom) described his commute and supported the 
resolution.  
10. Petya K. (Zoom) stated she is a public transit user who finds it 
challenging and dangerous to navigate the Quarry Road intersection 
currently. These proposed improvements will help people go to and 
from the hospital and transit center and will enhance connectivity to 
the larger bicycle and pedestrian network. She encouraged the 
Council to put the resolution on the ballot.  
11. Jason K. (Zoom), on behalf of VTA, expressed support for the Staff 
recommendation for the Quarry Road connection as a key location for 
making transit successful in Santa Clara County. He requested to 
approve the Staff recommendation and add it to the ballot.  
Council Member Burt described that this intermodal center has the second 
highest boardings of all Caltrain stations in the system and is the largest bus 
terminal in Santa Clara County but has bad circulation. This would be a big 
step in the right direction of improvement. All the involved agencies, 
Stanford, Caltrain, the City, VTA, need to work together. There needs to be 
an easement for the roadway from Stanford as a precondition for going 
forward. Addressing the concerns the community has over the small amount 
of park land undedication, he noted it was about 1/3 of an acre and across 
the street was just dedicated the Tower Well Park site, about the same 
amount of acreage. More importantly, there are many locations in the City 
that are eligible to be dedicated as park land. He stated he was working on a 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
colleague’s memo in regard to this and hoped to have a parallel proposal in 
the same time frame for significantly more park being created than the small 
amount proposed to be undedicated here.  
Council Member Kou felt the unresolved issues of tree replacement and 
landscaping plan, construction funding, maintenance and operational 
responsibilities needed to be discussed ahead of time, not after, especially 
the relationship to the El Camino Park lease. She felt it was too early for 
even a Resolution of Intention at this point. She stated it was a good project 
for connectivity and to address housing coming forward but would feel more 
comfortable once the other issues were resolved.  
City Manager Shikada explained there was a very compressed time frame to 
potentially get this on the ballot for November, which is why this is on the 
agenda at this point. He also described that because the property is owned 
by the University, the City is not seeking fee title or ownership. To have the 
property intertwined as part of the lease as opposed to separated through an 
easement presents some risk as to what happens in the future. There should 
be further discussion with the University to achieve what the City needs to 
proceed with the project.  
Council Member Kou added that the El Camino Park lease with the University 
is going to end in 2042 with necessity to renegotiate on a lease, which 
concerned her. She was also concerned about maintenance and operational 
responsibilities for the future as it will most likely be on the City with the 
City's funding applied toward that.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims described that while this is technically park 
land, it is more like wild land with a big utility box on it. She was not sad to 
lose this land and repeated that there is more park land to dedicate. She 
stated the concept was good for rail and bus commuters, cyclists and 
pedestrians, the economics of bus transit, and the environment.  
Council Member Veenker agreed with the goal of encouraging greater use of 
mass transit and enhancing bike and pedestrian access and felt the area 
needed a facelift anyway. She stated the area is already cut off from the rest 
of the park and believed this was an opportunity to upgrade it. She 
questioned how the area would be maintained. She asked if it was possible 
to get a preliminary approval with Caltrans before going through the entire 
process.  
City 
Manager 
Shikada 
anticipated 
there 
would 
be 
memoranda 
of 
understanding between any parties involved.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
Director Low answered that in preliminary conversations with Caltrans, they 
were supportive of the project and have encouraged pedestrian and bicycle 
connections on both sides.  
Council Member Tanaka questioned if the City was able to sublease this 
property. He felt the City should be compensated for relinquishing this asset.  
City Manager Shikada did not believe the land could be subleased. There was 
discussion about the history of this lease.  
Mayor Stone asked if there was data available on how dangerous the Quarry 
Road and El Camino Real intersection is. He questioned if there had been 
conversations with Stanford about the suggestion of a land swap. He felt it 
would be an uphill battle to pass a measure undedicating park land and that 
being able to show the other agencies were helping with the lift and 
sacrificing as well would go a long way. He thought the benefits outweighed 
losing the park land in this instance.  
Rafael Rius, City Engineer, noted he did not have the safety information but 
could research it. He did not particularly recall it as a dangerous intersection.  
Director Low stated she would defer to the Real Estate team but believed 
Stanford saw it as a public project and a benefit to the public.  
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member 
Lythcott-Haims, to adopt a Resolution of Intention to Undedicate a portion of 
El Camino Park that is necessary for the new transit connection (Attachment 
E). 
Council Member Burt explained that a significantly improved transit center is 
a real public benefit, resulting in less traffic, less parking demand, and fewer 
greenhouse gases and emissions and supporting economic development. He 
felt the issues about bike and pedestrian circulation needed to be worked out 
as part of the plan and not an afterthought.  
Council Member Kou agreed that everything Council Member Burt said was 
exactly why this should happen but stated she would prefer to be reassured 
in terms of ownership.  
MOTION PASSED: 5-1-1, Kou no, Lauing absent 
 
12. 
Addition of 16 properties to the City’s Historic Resources Inventory 
based on Owner interest. CEQA Status: Pursuant to Public Resources 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
Code Section 21065, the Historic Designation of Properties is not a 
Project Subject to Environmental Review. 
Amy French, Chief Planning Official, gave an overview of this item. The 
purpose was to receive the HRB's and Staff's recommendations and place 3 
City properties and 13 privately owned properties in the Palo Alto Historic 
Inventory. She listed the properties involved, including some photos.  
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
1. 
John B. stated his property was on the eligible list but chose to object 
to being placed on the inventory. He appreciated the process set up 
to review the results from the 2000 survey and renew that in 2023. 
He suggested that going forward the Council direct the HRB to be 
more explicit in the requirements they have for placing properties on 
the list and to affirm it would take owners' approval to be placed on 
the list. He also felt the City should review what incentives might be 
offered to properties agreeing to be on the list because a lot of 
owners feel it reduces the property value and they are giving 
something up.  
2. 
Darlene Y. requested Council direct Staff to update the ordinance 
that applications for historic listing must have owners opt in. She also 
asked that if Staff is directed to continue outreach, objecting 
properties be removed from the eligible list as they have already 
opted out.  
3. 
Amy S., speaking on behalf of Nancy G., Umang S., Arti M., and Don 
J. and speaking as a local realtor, was pleased the recommendation 
was not to add the homes objecting to being included. She explained 
that in her professional experience, a historic designation, even a 
potential designation, creates a huge gray area and can reduce a 
property value by 10% to 20%. She stated private homes are not 
museums to be preserved  
4. 
Jennifer B. supported the previous speaker. 
5. 
Mala N. stated this has been a process of a lot of uncertainty. She 
felt this listing serves no useful purpose for owners who objected to 
being on the list. She believed the eligible list was an example of 
government overreach and urged the Council to remove the eligible 
list.  
6. 
Michael D. (Zoom) was concerned that by limiting this agenda item 
to the people that agreed to historic status, the Council was ignoring 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
the process that is trying to force homeowners into historic status. 
He stated this arbitrary designation with no real guidelines was 
affecting people's lives.  
7. 
Lin (Zoom) noted she has decided to opt out of the list and echoed 
the previous speakers, asking the council members to reconsider the 
project integrity as there were 83 objections out of 88 properties.  
Council Member Kou questioned why those owners who have already opted 
out were not included in this report so they can be removed from the eligible 
list. She felt this warranted further understanding and discussion because 
even being on the national list was still a concern.  
Chief Planning Official French responded that there was no local eligible list 
but there was no change to the national register eligible property list, which 
is not maintained by the City. She further explained that there was a 
potentially eligible category of unevaluated properties built before 1948. This 
causes some confusion in the community.  
Council Member Tanaka shared Council Member Kou's concerns. He 
suggested the list should be opt-in and require owners to proactively submit 
for approval rather than needing to complain to get off the list. He was in 
agreement with accepting the 16 properties that have affirmed interest.  
Jonathon Lait, Planning and Development Director, gave further background 
on the intention of this item and clarified that the idea of potential eligible 
properties was not a part of this discussion. He suggested based on 
comments from council members that there should possibly be a discussion 
on what could happen to those properties, but that is a separate item.  
There was further discussion about the difference between the various lists 
being questioned. The list for local designation does not live on after this 
process.  
Council Member Veenker supported the Staff recommendation with the list 
not living on after the completion of the process.  
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member 
Veenker, to: 
1. 
Adopt the attached record of land use action (Attachment A) to add 
16 properties meeting specified criteria to the City’s Historic 
Resources Inventory, based on expressed owner interest; and, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 18 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/22/2024 
2. 
Direct Staff to continue outreach to eligible property owners among 
the properties discussed in this report and to place future additions 
to the Historic Resources Inventory with expressed owner interest on 
the Consent Calendar; and, 
3. 
Direct Staff to study the possibility of a process for removing the 
properties as shown as potentially eligible in the parcel reports and 
return to Council with evaluations on any alternatives. 
Council Member Tanaka asked how much the City was paying the consultant 
for the process.  
Director Lait stated he would come back with the exact cost.  
There was discussion about the wording of the motion.  
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Lauing absent 
 
ADJOURNMENT: The meeting was adjourned at 11:22 P.M. 
