CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 17
Regular Meeting
February 26, 2024
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely:  
Absent:  
Mayor Stone called the meeting to order in honor of the lives of the two young women who
lost their lives in the past week and asked for a brief moment of silence. 
City Clerk Mahealani Ah Yun called role with all present.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to go into
Closed Session.  
Closed Session
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY- EXISTING LITIGATION Subject: Reinert v. City of
Palo Alto Santa Clara County Superior Court Case No. 21-CV-391286 ( One Case, as
Defendant) Authority: Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(1) 
Mayor Stone asked if there was a motion to go into closed session in regard to Item number 1.  
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to go into
Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
Council went into Closed Session at 5:35 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:35 P.M. 
Mayor Stone announced no reportable action. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
Ed Shikada, City Manager called attention to Item number 11 having been placed on the agenda
in error. It was removed and rescheduled as an action item on March 18.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 26/2024
Public Comment
Mayor Stone set some ground rules for public comment. He made everyone aware that some
of the slide shows and videos that would be shown by public speakers contained troubling
images.  
1. 
Deborahlise M. speaking on behalf of (8): Tuba S., Yasa B., Moiez B., Talha A., Hadi S., 
Aziz S., Humza S. provided Council with facts to include what she described as acts of
genocide. She stated her original request for a ceasefire resolution was a litmus test to
evaluate the principles of the Council. She opined that the US has affirmed its position
as complicit in Israel’ s crimes. She thought it would be wise for Council to create a
statement along the parameters of the ICJ Preliminary Ruling in the prevention of
further genocidal acts. She described what this would entail. She provided a video of
Nada Tarbush discussing events in Gaza that included footage of war and requested that
states stop sending weapons to Israel.    
2. 
Eric S. speaking on behalf of (8): Sarit, Elinor, Avivit, Ilana, Yuval, Lisa, Adele spoke about
Daniel Patrick Moynihan who said, “ Everyone is entitled to their own opinions but they
are not entitled to their own facts”. He showed footage of protests and slides discussing
what he believed to be false accusations leveled at Israel in the course of the conflict
against Hamas and Gaza. He opined that calls for ceasefires were based on fallacies and
a misconception of how to achieve a lasting peace for Palestinians and Israelis. 
3. 
Allyson R. speaking on behalf of (8): Estee, Giora, Kenneth, Hanna, Edith, Ofra, Sarith
saw the community of Palo Alto being torn apart by the fight over a ceasefire. She
provided a website to go to for daily reports of medicine, food, fuel shipments and other
humanitarian aid. She observed that a proclamation from Palo Alto would have no
impact on the negotiation of a ceasefire. She declared that Jews felt betrayed by the
propaganda
and lies demonizing
Israelis. She refuted the accusation
of Israeli
committing genocide. She felt the Israeli-Hamas war was an attempt at genocide and
that Israel has no choice but defend its citizens. She showed a slide discussing that the
Israeli-Hamas war was not just about Israel but was one of several fights against radical
Islamic Jihadi terrorist groups to convert infidels to radical Islam. She described other
examples of these slaughters by Jihadi groups. She talked about views of Mosab Hassan
Yousef who warned that Hamas would not stop at the Jews and Israel. She said that
Palestinians have a personal refugee agency that has been infiltrated by Hamas. She
discussed Imam Mohammed Mushtaha’ s arrest when he told Hamas he did not want to
preach that his community should kill. She ended that Hamas must be destroyed for
everyone’ s sake in the Middle East.  
4. 
Noel S. proclaimed this war was not for the safety of Jews but was genocide. She stated
a captive population was being bombed and people are starving.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 26/2024
5. 
Lori M. shared a story about a staff-recommended booklist on the Israeli-Palestinian
Conflict on the Palo Alto Library website that included a Palestinian author who has
publicly posted antisemitism. When confronted the librarian replied, “ Our goal is to
provide the information and tools people need to be exposed to various viewpoints”. 
She did not condone book banning but asked if this was a various viewpoint consistent
with Palo Alto.   
6. 
Talha B. ( Zoom) discussed an event hosted the prior day at City Hall where over 300
multicultural, multiethnic and multireligious members of Palo Alto came out in favor of
humanity, justice and peace for all people. He opined that peace in Palestine is not
equated to antisemitism or racism.  
7. 
Aram J. ( Zoom) declared that the genocide that is occurring is from the bombs, airplanes
and weapons the U.S. is supplying. In the next few weeks, he intends to talk about why
the item about restricting signage in the Council chambers should have been agendized.  
8. 
Mam ( Zoom) stated there are people that do not want Palestinians to exist and are
upset at Palestinians peacefully protesting at City Hall. She described a woman harassing
peaceful protestors at a rally in solidarity for Palestine the prior day and said these are
the hate crimes to be concerned about against Palestinians, Muslims and Arabs. She
added that apartheid, colonialism, the brutalization of an entire group of people and
genocide could not be justified.    
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements
Council Member Veenker congratulated GreenWaste of Palo Alto and the Teamsters Local 350
for reaching an agreement on the first-ever contract stating it was important to the zero waste
effort and sustainability goals in the City.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims reported that the Cubberley Ad-Hoc Committee has had three
or four meetings this year not including two closed sessions with the full Council.  
Mayor Stone stated that on Thursday the City of Palo Alto hosted the Green Transition Summit
which was a summit held with Sweden and the State of California.  
Consent Calendar
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 5, 6, 7, 9. 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 9. 
Council Member Kou and Council Member Tanaka requested to pull Agenda Item Number 9. 
MOTION:  Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to
approve Agenda Item Numbers 2-10, 12. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/26/2024
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 2-4, 8, 10, 12:  7-0
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 5, 6, 7:  6-1, Tanaka no
MOTION PASSED ITEM 9:  5-2, Kou, Tanaka no
Public Comment:  
1. 
Penny E. (Zoom) spoke regarding Consent Calendar Item 9. She provided that with these
contracts North Palo Alto would get advanced stakeholders surveys, interviews, design
charrettes, digital engagement, developer roundtable
analysis and assessment of
community infrastructure
assets and services for increased population along with
mobility and connectivity analysis with policy recommendations, architectural review, 
open space and landscape design standards and guidelines, assessment of opportunities
and constraints and CEQA analysis. This is in striking contrast to the $15,000 Cal Poly
student-run San Antonio area process that is currently underway. She attended the
second Cal Poly meeting the prior day. The work to date reflects students’ inexperience
and shallow knowledge of the area. She questioned why Staff recommended master
planning for downtown ahead of master planning for areas south of Oregon Expressway
that are already rezoned for housing and said they needed a professional master
planning process for San Antonio right now. She added several large projects have
already been approved with many more moving forward and they are already behind. 
She wanted to know why the MTC grant was not written to request money for South
Palo Alto areas that are already identified through lion’s share housing development
requirement and if the downtown master plan will yield 100 times more housing than
South Palo Alto upzoned areas. She wanted Staff asked to clarify the target number of
units they expect this downtown housing master plan to yield toward the City’s housing
requirement.  
Council Member Kou appreciated Ms. Ellson’s views about Item Number 9. She has also
attended the community planning for South Palo Alto. She felt there was a hodgepodge way of
planning for South Palo Alto that stunts development. She provided examples. She thought the
grant from MTC of $ 800,000 where the remainder would leave the City coming up with
approximately $ 950,000 to $1.1 million dollars was going to be on mostly project management
and coordination and community outreach and engagement and they saw how that went with
NVCAP. There is community assessment, policy development and downtown housing plan
preparation but asked where the money was for building, construction, prevailing wages and
infrastructure. She thought this was unfair and not community environment land-use planning.   
Council Member Tanaka spoke about Item Number 5. He said he could not support the
provided cost per megawatt hour as it was double what the market rate is. On Item Number 6, 
he felt the amount being spent was too much and kept going up. On Item Number 7, he
pointed out the fee was going up 69 percent and he could not see justification in it. On Item
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/26/2024
Number 9, he liked the Downtown Housing Plan but did not like the fact that they have two
bids and they went beyond the high-end bid. He thought the inequity with what is going on in
South Palo Alto was a good point and that it deserved more discussion.   
Laren Lai, new Administrative Services Director and Chief Financial Officer, introduced herself
discussing her critical role as CFO and her previous experience.   
2. 
Approval of Minutes from February 5, 2024 and February 12, 2024 meetings. 
3. 
Appointment of 2024 Emergency Standby Council
4. 
City Councilmember Appointment to the Santa Clara County Housing and Community
Development Advisory Committee ( HCDAC) 
5. 
Adopt a Resolution Authorizing the City Manager or Their Designee to Execute a Third
Phase Agreement with Northern California Power Agency for the Purchase of up to
2,800 Megawatt-Hours per Year of Biogas Energy from Zero Waste Energy Development
Company, LLC over a Term of up to 10 Years for a Total Not to Exceed Amount of $5.7
Million; CEQA Status: Not a Project under CEQA Guidelines Section 15378(b)(5) 
6. 
Approval of Amendment No. 6 to Contract No. C16163034A with Nova Partners, Inc. to
Add $ 766,919, Increasing the Not to Exceed Amount to $ 9,647,825, for Additional
Construction
Management
Services
for the New
Public
Safety
Building
Capital
Improvement Program Project (PE- 15001) and Extend the Contract Term; and Approval
of Amendment No. 2 to Contract No. S20177452 with Schaaf & Wheeler Consulting Civil
Engineers to Add $ 9,600, Increasing the Not to Exceed Amount to $ 20,200, for
Additional Professional Services and Extend the Contract Term for the New Public Safety
Building Capital Improvement
Program project ( PE- 15001); CEQA: Environmental
Impact Report for the New Public Safety Building and New California Avenue Area
Parking Garage (Resolution No. 9772) 
7. 
Approval of Amendment No. 1 to Professional Services Agreement S21180224 with
Matrix Consulting Group for a Planning and Development Services Fee Study in the
Amount of $56,500 for a total Not to Exceed of $138,000 and Extension of the Contract
Term through January 31, 2026. Environmental Assessment: Exempt in Accordance with
CEQA Guidelines Section 15061(3)(b). 
8. 
Approve and Authorize the City Manager to Execute a Funding Agreement with the
Valley Transportation Authority ( VTA) to Accept a $250,000 Grant as part of the 2010
Measure B Vehicle Registration Fee (VRF) Countywide Program Cycle Four; CEQA status
Statutorily Exempt. 
9. 
Approve Two Contracts for Consultant
Services for the Downtown Housing Plan: 
Contract Number C24187236 with Wallace Roberts & Todd, LLC ( WRT) for a Not-to
Exceed Amount of $1,508,254 to Provide Planning and Consulting Services to Develop
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 26/2024
the City’s Downtown Housing Plan for a Term of Two-years with an Optional One-year
Extension; and Contract Number C24187237 with Good City Company ( Good City) for a
Not-to Exceed Amount of $375,522 to Provide Project Management and Consulting
Services for the City’s Downtown Housing Plan for a Term of Two-years with an Optional
One-year Extension. CEQA Action: Agreements are not subject to CEQA
10. 
Approval of Professional Services Contract with Ecology Action for a Not-to-Exceed
Amount
of $ 139,968 for City of Palo Alto
Safe
Routes to School
Spring/ Fall
Programming; CEQA status – categorically exempt (educational program). 
11. 
SECOND READING: Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Amending Chapter
8.04 ( Street, Trees, Shrubs, and Plants) and Chapter 8.10 ( Tree Preservation and
Management Regulations) ( FIRST READING: January 16, 2024 PASSED 5-2, Lythcott-
Haims, Tanaka no) Removed from Consent
12. 
Approval of the Appointment of Lauren Lai as the Administrative Services Director/ 
Chief Financial Officer
City Manager Comments
Ed Shikada, City Manager, provided a slide presentation acknowledging the difficult time
experienced by the community over the last week plus. He noted a message of support for the
community Mayor Stone put in the newsletter the previous week leading to ongoing support
programs available. He noted that the City has undertaken a series of mental health first aid
training programs that will dovetail with work that Palo Alto Unified School District is
undertaking as well as their partners at Project Safety Net and Momentum for Health in
expanding the availability of mental health first aid training and workshops through the
community. They expect to be able to announce additional dates that will be available as well
as more information about this program. He noted the library has scheduled specific dates for
the first of two-part sessions on mental health first aid on Saturday March 9. Information for
this could be found on the City’s homepage and he provided the link. He provided detail
regarding the Caltrans State Route 82 Bike Lane Proposal, Creek Corridor Protection Ordinance
Update Community Info Session and notable tentative upcoming Council items.   
Council Member Burt noted that he was considering supporting pulling Item Number 9 but
when he did a preliminary review of next week’s agenda Item Number 8, he noted it looks like
one item is approval of a consultant contract for a specific plan for the San Antonio Corridor. 
That sounded reassuring enough that he opted not to pull Item Number 9. He asked for
clarification about making sure that the corridor has a strategic plan.  
City Manager Shikada answered as a part of the item that will be discussed the next week and
the priorities including housing for social and economic balance, one of the objectives was the
approval of a consulting contract this calendar year in order to initiate a specific plan for the
San Antonio corridor. He wanted to ensure Council is aware that the planning effort along San
Antonio corridor has included the work being done by their team of students from Cal Poly San
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 26/2024
Luis Obispo but is not limited to that. There will be follow-up work both to City Council and a
full community engagement as next steps.  
Action Items
13. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Objections to Weed Abatement at Affected Properties and Approval
of Affected Property List for Commencing Weed Abatement in 2024; CEQA status – 
exempt
Tamara Jasso, Fire Marshall, presented a hearing to allow property owners listed on the
county’ s 2024 commencement report to be heard and have their objections considered after
Council adopted a resolution declaring weeds a nuisance. She provided detail about the Weed
Abatement program.   
Public Comment: 
1. 
Zheng ( George) Z. stated if he knew when the deadline would be and when the
inspection would come he would have prepared his lawn. He talked about a family
emergency the previous year that left little time for lawn maintenance. He said that he
cleaned up his lawn after inspection and before he received a notice from the county for
which he provided pictures. He asked the county to consider his situation and exempt
him and he would keep the property clean in the future. He added he would submit his
argument to the secretary and provide his address to the clerk as he was asked.  
2. 
Jonathan Brown (Zoom) objected to the listing of his property at 415 Fernando Avenue, 
APN 13239038 on the 2022 Weed Abatement Program Assessment Report. He declared
the property to be in full compliance of all applicable laws for three or more years. He
said there should be a constructive dialog to mitigate any actual hazards before any
notice is issued and enforcement action taken. He added that the ordinance is unevenly
enforced in the neighborhood. He sought removal of his property from the list.   
Council Member Kou asked how the owner was contacted if unable to receive the notices.  
Santa Clara County Representative answered they do not have access to all of that information. 
They send a notice to every property owner of this proceeding which includes contact
information from his office. He stated they attempt to address all of the properties they find to
be noncompliant; however, they do not go everywhere in the City unless they are asked to or
have another property in that area to address. He noted he would go through the records and
remove Mr. Brown’ s property from the list.  
Council Member Burt queried if they would be acting on that specific list of properties.  
Santa Clara County Representative clarified that the purpose of the hearing was so they could
act on each of the contested properties as individual items.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/26/2024
Council Member Kou wanted to confirm the times listed on Attachment C.  
Santa Clara County Representative provided clarification on those listed times.  
Council Member Veenker wanted to know how it plays out if the weeds are removed before
they get there.   
Santa Clara County Representative stated the properties in question were not already on the
program so they received an ad letter. They were not charged anything at that point. If the
property were to stay on the program, they would go and inspect to ensure compliance. Every
property inspected will have to pay an inspection fee of $ 96. If they are noncompliant, 
additional fees will be added and should they abatement, that fee will also be added to the cost
of their assessment.  
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Lauing to:  
a. Adopt a determination that weed abatement activities in 2024, as described in
Resolution 10135 (Attachment A) adopted by Council on December 4, 2023, are exempt
under Class 8 (CEQA Guidelines section 15308); 
b. Hold a Public Hearing to hear and consider any objections to the proposed destruction
and removal of weeds in 2024 at the properties listed in Attachment B; and
c. Approve the final list of affected properties for weed abatement in 2024 (Attachment B) 
following the public hearing, and direct weed abatement activities to commence at
those properties in accordance with Resolution 10135; and
d. Refer the two objections located at 415 Fernando Ave and 354 El Verano Ave to the
County enforcement office for review and with no enforcement action pending that
review. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
14. 
Adoption
of a Resolution
Suspending
Enforcement
of Municipal
Code
Sections
16.14.090, 16.14.110 and 16.14.300 Requiring All-electric Construction and Direction to
Staff to Commence
Work on Local Amendments
to the California
Energy Code
Establishing a One Margin Standard. CEQA Status – Not a Project. 
Christine Tam, Senior Resources Planner, provided slides discussing the background for the
proposal, legal challenges to building electrification
laws, other cities’ actions and Staff
recommendations.   
Public Comment: 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/26/2024
1. 
Larry K. expressed his hope that the six month time given was accurate. He was
concerned that there may be units built using gas appliances. He hoped the budget
amendment would be enough to encourage and promote all electric residences. He
added that Staff and the City Attorney’ s office should provide a legal warning that the
City is considering doing away with gas service and it may not be usable in the future. 
He hoped Staff would keep a record as to how many applicants choose gas hookups. 
2. 
Julia Z., Executive Director of the Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition, urged Council to
enact the One Margin Standard as soon as possible. She opined that the court ruling was
a setback to climate goals.   
3. 
Emily L., Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition, urged Council to implement a One Margin
Standard as soon as possible. She understood adjustments must be made to avoid
litigation but the was not an excuse to allow weaker environmental protections. 
4. 
Avroh S., Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition, urged Council to look to other standards
as climate action needed to be taken without mixed messages. He understood they
could not set aside One Margin Reach Codes that regulate based on emissions but they
could based on electrical efficiency.   
5. 
Amie A. (Zoom), Executive Director of Palo Alto Forward, stated her organization agreed
with the five measures suggested in the Student Climate Coalition’ s letter and 350 SV. 
Even if One Margin Code is adopted, other actions will need to be identified to meet the
80/ 30 goal and they cannot get there without significant VMT reductions. She hoped
this was the start of a conversation around implantation of additional SCAP policies
needed to reach their goals.  
6. 
Christine W. (Zoom), Attorney with SSL Law Firm in San Francisco, submitted a comment
letter on behalf of owner of 1325 Parkinson the prior week in order to make clear that
from a legal perspective there was no choice but to suspend enforcement of the all-
electric ordinance given the decision in the Berkeley case. She supported Staff’s position
in their report that the suspension should apply to pending applications, previously
approved
applications
and previously
approved
building
permits
especially
with
homeowners seeking only to have a gas stove or an outdoor firepit rather than an all-
gas home system.  
7. 
Kat S. ( Zoom), member of 350 SV Palo Alto, stated their organization understands the
need to change Palo Alto’s all-electric reach code in light of the Berkeley ruling but they
do not need to allow things beyond the scope of the Berkeley ruling. She pointed out
that none of the previously listed outdoor appliances were considered “ covered
appliances” under EPCA. She emphasized the phrase in the Berkeley ruling that states, 
premises where gas is otherwise available” because they have the option to make it
available or not outside of the Berkeley ruling. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 26/2024
Council Member Burt asked about the timing it is going to take to implement the One Margin
program, why other cities were further along in this adoption and what steps were needed to
move forward. He wanted to know how quickly they could get it to the Council to get it to the
state to get approved. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services Director, answered there are a number of
electrification initiatives underway in different departments and their focus has been on trying
to advance those and they were expecting that the Appeals Court might take up the issue. His
best guess as to when they could get it to Council was six months.  
Jonathan Abendschein, Utilities Assistant Director, said it was his understanding that there are
model codes out there and they can draw on the work that has been done at other cities. They
will move forward as quickly as possible.  
Ms. Tam added that any model energy code the City adopts has to be cost effective and there
are studies that have already been done using Palo Alto’s utility rates. They can look at these
existing studies to meet the cost effectiveness criteria. Once City Council adopts the code after
the second reading, Staff will submit the approved code to the California Energy Commission
and they have a 60-day public comment period. After that period, the CEC will schedule it for
their closest business meeting where they will adopt the City’s reach code and then it will be
sent to the Building and Standards Commission for filing.  
Council Member Veenker thought they might not be done with this by the time the moratorium
ends.  
Mr. Lait stated it is their intent to have a new One Margin ordinance adopted before the
expiration date of the moratorium and if not they would extend the moratorium.    
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked what could be achieved if an emergency mentality was
adopted, if they would take San Luis Obispo, San Jose and Santa Cruz into account, when did
the Ninth Circuit decision go into effect and what legal risk did they take on if they did not
approve the moratorium that night.   
Mr. Lait thought the real key was the community engagement strategy. If they are asked to
prepare the work and bring it straight back to City Council, that will allow them to return before
the summer recess.  
Molly Stump, City Attorney, stated the substance of the Ninth Circuit ruling became applicable
to all jurisdictions within the Ninth Circuit except the City of Berkeley in April 2023.  
Vice Mayor Lauing thought they should not argue against the Ninth Circuit appeal and move on
with an alternative. They should keep implementing
programs that will accelerate the
transition. He thought the first step was to lay out to developers and home owners the
economic and climate benefits of all electric in new constructions and remodeled homes and
underscore the City’s commitment to be all electric would not change. He pointed out the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 26/2024
Utilities Department with the Utilities Commission input was looking at an about $300 million
dollar projected investment to get the utilities infrastructure in place. The feasibility study was
approved a couple of months previous for a detailed investigation to figure out what incentives
are needed to get people to all electric, particularly with respect to lower-income people. He
wanted to know if the FTE was already onboard.  
Mr. Abendschein answered they have both a consultant and a retiree onboard that can help
with the in-house work that needs to be done. He said there may be some modest impacts to
ongoing Climate Action Plan work but it was expected most things would keep going in parallel.  
Council Member Kou received confirmation that the electrification grid modernization and
expansion was going to continue moving forward. With regards to Bay Area air quality, she
remembered a report that gas-powered appliances would be outlawed by a certain year. She
asked if it has come up yet and have any effect. She asked if they are offering for people who
already have all electrification on their property and commercial buildings to install gas.  
Council Member Veenker answered that the Air District adopted appliance regulations that
prevent point of sale purchase of new NOx emitting appliances. She said they are differently
situated than the cities with respect to the reach codes and their regulations are still in full
effect.  
Mr. Lait stated with the adoption of the moratorium, applicants who are either under
construction or seeking a permit would be able to adjust or modify the application to go to
natural gas. There would be fees for the revision to the permit.  
Mayor Stone wanted to know what other potential options identified in the staff report would
take longer to implement.  
Ms. Tam answered the all-electric preferred code that Palo Alto adopted in the 2016 cycle
allows all electric new construction without any additional efficiency requirements while at the
same time opposing additional efficiency requirements on mixed-fuel buildings. The One
Margin Code adopts one standard for all new buildings. It has a lower legal risk than the all-
electric preferred.  
Mayor Stone described how the zero NOx policy is a series of tradeoffs. He asked if Staff felt
that the One Margin was the superior alternative. He queried if they have considered whether
all electrification
requirements for outdoors was considered in the court’s decision. He
wondered if Staff believes that the state will alter the code significantly in the next cycle where
the One Margin might no longer be allowed.  
Ms. Tam answered that was the easiest and quickest way to adopt a replacement reach code
for Palo Alto. She stated that because the state building code gets updated every three years, 
any local reach code that gets adopted will be refreshed every three years.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 26/2024
Ms. Stump added it was also believed to carry the least risk. Regarding outdoor appliances, she
thought the issue was whether the appliances in question were regulated by EPCA. It was her
understanding that some outdoor equipment is covered and that would be swept within the
reasoning of the Berkeley ruling. If there are outdoor appliances that are not covered by EPCA, 
the City would be able to regulate gas to those appliances without being preempted by EPCA. 
She thought Staff work on what the universe of non-EPCA covered appliances was.   
Mr. Lait discussed impacts on Planning and Development Services on getting it back to them
before the summer break.   
Mr. Abendschein spoke about impacts on utilities in getting it back to them before the summer
break.  
Council Member Burt wanted an explanation of what is involved other than the outreach and
replicating of a code that is largely what other cities have done.  
Mr. Abendschein stated that they know the codes and studies are out there but they have not
done an exhaustive review of them. They do not know what conflicts they may run into with
Palo Alto’s community structure. They are giving the best assessments they can of the potential
trade-offs that might need to be made to move as quickly as they are talking about.  
Council Member Burt asked if his understanding is correct that there may be impacts and not
that there will be impacts. He expressed disappointment that more work had not been done
prior to bringing this to the Council. He discussed resources that could help determine what
outdoor appliances were included or excluded from the list. He looked forward to having clarity
on that.   
Mr. Abendschein answered that he rarely saw a project like this where something unexpected
does not come up requiring some level of effort. It may be that they are able to bring
everything over but it is likely that something will come up.  
Mr. Lait said they do not know specifically about the impacts. He discussed reasons more work
had not been done. He clarified that they were identifying the likely areas that would be
impacted if the need arose to divert resources to address this issue.  
Council Member Veenker asked for clarification if the impacts were in general or if they rushed
the work to June. She wondered if they could facilitate expediting the community outreach to
help moves things along. She asked for more information about the cost effective analysis they
would have to put together.  
Mr. Lait said the report written two weeks ago was in relation to them grappling with this
unscheduled workload item and their best guess on areas they thought might be impacted. 
They are trying to estimate the workload impact to other priority projects. The community
engagement piece is another piece adding to that length of time. They share the understanding
of wanting to return as quickly as possible. They will use information other cities have pursued
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 26/2024
as much as they can to move forward. Due to the unknowns, they do not want to commit to a
time and not deliver. 
Ms. Tam stated they need to demonstrate that any reach code that Palo Alto adopts needs to
be cost effective to the homeowner over the lifetime of the building. The cost effectiveness test
needs to take into consideration the construction cost as well as Palo Alto’s projected rates 30
years out. They can look at studies San Jose has done and make sure they utilize Palo Alto utility
rates. Those studies have been completed for the most part but they have not looked at the
results as of yet.  
Vice Mayor Lauing wanted action on the things that would be impacted so they could
determine what they might want to postpone if the need arises.  
Mayor Stone wondered if they could include that discussion on the second round of the priority
objectives.  
Mr. Shikada said that whatever extent Staff was able to get better information within the next
two weeks that would be fair. He said that up until this point, Staff has not been assigned to
work on this and that will take some time to get up to speed on the work ahead. He did not
believe the impact would be zero. He asked to be allowed to do work to provide better clarity
on that.  
Council
Member
Lythcott-Haims
opined
monitoring
the gap between
the moratorium
enforcement and having the code in place will take Staff time. She felt it was ethically sound
that they have had significant conversation with the public about this conceptually. She thought
expediency had to be prioritized. She was prepared to support and acknowledgement that the
community outreach process has effectively already happened.  
Mayor Stone wondered if there would be way to amend the current code similar to the
California standard to allow a theoretical alternative as long as the applicant can show the
alternative is just as energy efficient instead of placing the moratorium. He questioned if courts
have yet adjudicated whether the California energy code requiring heat pump water heating in
most buildings is legal under federal law.  
Ms. Stump answered they would fall back to the existing underlying
California
code
immediately so that would not be necessary. She stated she was not aware of a challenge to
the heat pump water heating program.  
George Hoyt, Chief Building Official, stated that in the event of the moratorium, they will revert
back to the standard energy compliance code as adopted for the 2022 regulations which would
show the standard efficiency that is established by the state as well as the electrification
readiness of residential and multifamily projects.  
Ms. Tam added that the staff report should be reading that it does not mandate heat pump
water heating. It says heat pump water heating and space heating is a prescriptive requirement
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 26/2024
but the building energy code can still be met by not having a gas water heater in place but
additional efficiency elsewhere in the home needs to be demonstrated.  
Mr. Hoyt said the energy code has two paths for compliance. A prescriptive path that identifies
compliance if certain needs are met and a performance path. The prescriptive sets the baseline
for the performance.  
Council Member Kou asked if that means that each project would have a baseline based on
square footage. She opined they would want to know what appliances would be banned by the
Berkeley ban.  
Mr. Hoyt answered there is a complicated formula and each project has to invest in an energy
rater that does a state energy evaluation report that is provided to them to demonstrate
compliance. Doing the One Margin, they will be looking at setting adjusted increased values in
that energy compliance portion for different types of projects.  
Ms. Stump answered that was one of the rationales that the Ninth Circuit used to support its
conclusion that Berkeley’ s ban on gas piping is preempted by the federal statute that governs
energy efficiency of covered appliances. The principle is that gas piping to covered appliances
cannot be banned. She thought they could do some work on determining what appliances are
included. She believed the list to be changing all the time as the agency adjusts it. It was not her
thought that Council would need to regulate at that level.  
Council Member Burt asked for more explanation on what basis regulating NOx would be
prohibited under Ninth Circuit decision.  
Ms. Stump answered they have a sister agency that governs the area that is regulated in that
area and she should advise on that confidentially.  
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Veenker to: 
1. Adopt a Resolution ( Attachment A) suspending enforcement of Municipal Code sections
16.14.090, 16.14.110 and 16.14.300, which require new residential and non-residential
buildings to be all electric, in light of the decision of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
Ninth Circuit in California Restaurant Association v. City of Berkeley; and, 
2. Direct staff to return to Council with amendments to the California Energy Code as
codified in Title 16 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code Building Regulations establishing a
One Margin” standard, which would allow for installation of natural gas plumbing while
imposing more stringent energy efficiency and all-electric readiness requirements to all
new buildings, which incentivizes the additional efficiency and lower emissions of all
electric equipment using clean electricity; and, 
3. Return to Council in 2-weeks with resource analysis where existing projects may be
delayed. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 26/2024
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
15. 
Policy and Services Committee Recommendations for Changes to the City Council
Procedures and Protocols Handbook based on Prior City Council Referrals ( Review of
Censure Language). CEQA Status - Not a Project. 
Ms. Stump commented on a discussion regarding whether or not to move forward with Item
Number 15 due to the time. She opined it is not always necessary to have a discussion if the
item has been reviewed and heard from a committee that heard it twice and spent hours on it, 
a motion could just be made to adopt it.  
Council Member Veenker stated they had spent quite a bit of time in Policy and Services talking
about the idea of censure and Staff had put a draft together for them and provided a chart and
some information on what other cities and surrounding areas did with respect to their censure. 
They all agree this was something that should be used with great discretion and not for political
advantage but they wanted to have some recourse if it was thought there had been
inappropriate behavior on behalf of someone on the dais. They had reviewed quite a few
reactions they could have as a body and ended up with admonishing, reprimanding and
directing to correct an action and a formal censure. She discussed definition and examples of
these terms.  
Council Member Tanaka commented that he had seen censure used in other cities as a weapon. 
He thought it would behoove everyone present to have a clear mind when this was reviewed
and discussed and suggested looking at it more closely before passing it.  
MOTION:  Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to
approve the Policy and Services recommendations on changes to Handbook Procedures Section
8: Enforcement with the language proposed in the draft City Council Procedures and Protocols
Handbook. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1, Tanaka no
16. 
Discussion on the 2024 Boards and Commissions Recruitment. CEQA Status - Not a
Project. 
Vinh Nguyen, Assistant City Clerk, presented slides discussing the Boards and Commissions
Recruitment. The
slides
detailed
background
information
to
provide
context
on the
recruitment, open positions for 2024 and interview options for discussion.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 26/2024
Council Member Burt recalled last year's review period was difficult getting the number of
meetings scheduled in a tight timeframe. He wanted to discuss making a change to the
ordinance to allow doing it twice a year would be better approach going forward.  
Vice Mayor Lauing expressed concern that the applicants were not getting enough respect
because they were rushing through and skipping some. He agreed splitting it up made sense. 
He commented that it is not consistent now and is being managed by each commission. He
thought that should be standardized in the procedure handbook. He opted for bullet point 1, 
not 2 and 3 and 4 would be default if necessary.   
Mayor Stone agreed there should be multiple recruitment periods during the year. He thought
each Council Member receiving a limited number of votes for who is interviewed made the
most sense. He opined having the applicants record the interviews made more work for
everybody. He felt it was their duty to vet the applications and make recommendations on who
moves forward with interviews. He asked what the threshold was the last time.  
Mr. Nguyen did not think there was a threshold last time. Anyone who got one vote was
brought in for an interview. He would check to be sure.  
Mayor Stone thought it made sense to at least increase the threshold to two.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims queried if there is a benefit of having everybody being
onboarded at the same time.  
City Manager Shikada thought that may put undue pressure onto the discussions being held at
HRC.  
Council Member Veenker asked if it was known if there are boards that are having issues with
quorum.  
Mr. Nguyen answered they are not aware of any boards having issues with quorum at this time
but some boards do have a lot of members whose seats are expiring. The municipal code does
allow the members who are expiring to continue serving until a new member is appointed but
some may not be interested in serving past their term.  
MOTION:  Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Mayor Stone to: 
1. Allow Council Members a limited number of votes ( number of vacancies plus 50%, 
round up) to select their preferred candidates to interview with a threshold of 2 votes
for an interview. 
2. Refer Board and Commission Handbook to the Policy & Services Committee to review
the practices of onboarding for Board and Commissions. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 17
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 26/2024
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:08 P.M. 
