CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 16
Regular Meeting
January 8, 2024
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely:  
Absent:  
Call to Order
Mayor Kou called all Council members to the dais and called the meeting to order.  
Interim City Clerk Mahealani Ah Yun took roll and declared all were present. 
Mayor Kou welcomed everyone and announced this was a ceremonial meeting in which Council
would select the mayor and vice mayor for 2024 and express appreciation for the 2023 mayor, 
vice mayor, and Council. She acknowledged Council members and elected officials who were
present – Council Member Lynette Lee Eng from Los Altos, Council Member Neysa Fligor from
Los Altos, Council Member Sally Meadows from Los Altos, Council Member Linda Swan from Los
Altos Hills, Council Member Margaret Abe-Koga from Mountain View, Council Member Emily
Ann Ramos from Mountain View, Mayor Yan Zhao from Saratoga, Mayor Larry Klein from
Sunnyvale, Council Member Russ Melton from Sunnyvale, Board Member Jennifer DiBrienza
from PAUSD, Vice President of PAUSD Shana Segal, Representative Alex Kobayashi from Office
of State Senator Josh Becker, Senior Field Representative Leslie Bulbuk from Office of State
Assemblymember Marc Berman, Policy Aide Kilian Mallon from Office of County Supervisor Joe
Simitian, Karen Holman former Council member and Mayor of Palo Alto, Council Member Hung
Wei from Cupertino, former Mayor and Council Member Liz Kniss, and former Council Member
and Mayor Betsy Bechtel. She thanked the many Palo Alto Board and Commission members
who were in the audience.  
Special Orders of the Day
1. 
Election of the 2024 Mayor
Mayor Kou outlined the procedure. Nominations for the position of mayor would be collected
from Council members. Four votes would be required. After the collection of nominations, 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/08/2024
Council Members who made a nomination and nominated Council Members would be invited
to speak, then other Council Members could comment, and then there would be public
comment. Public comments would be limited to the agenda topic. General public comments on
items not on the agenda would be taken after Council completed the items on the agenda. 
After the vote, the Clerk would distribute an electronic ballot to Council members. After
submission of all ballots, the Clerk would read aloud the name of each Council Member and
who they voted for. The nominee receiving the majority of votes would be elected mayor. The
new mayor would then conduct the election of the 2024 vice mayor in the same way. She
opened the floor for nominations for mayor.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims thanked Mayor Kou for her leadership. She nominated Vice
Mayor Stone for mayor.  
Council Member Tanaka nominated Council Member Veenker for mayor.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims voiced why she thought a vice mayor should be elevated to
mayor. However, her support for Vice Mayor Stone went beyond a procedural presumption of
elevating a vice mayor. She detailed why she supported Vice Mayor Stone for mayor, which
included the work he did for the City, his commitment to public service, his dedication to the
City, his style of leadership, his values around equity, his work with youth, and his
responsiveness to the community.  
Council Member Tanaka voiced that it had been a pleasure working with Council Member
Veenker, and he had been impressed with her fairness. He stated that the role of the mayor
was to run efficient and effective Council meetings, and he thought her legal background would
help in that. He described her as being thoughtful and caring.  
Council Member Veenker thanked Council Member Tanaka for the nomination. She was
flattered and humbled. She would be delighted to serve, but she respectfully declined the
nomination and supported the nomination of Vice Mayor Stone.  
Vice Mayor Stone thanked Council Member Lythcott-Haims for the nomination and her
comments. He stated it was an honor to be nominated, and he humbly accepted. He thanked
Mayor Kou for her leadership, mentorship, and friendship. He felt prepared to step into the
role. He looked forward to working with Council members in 2024.  
Council Member Burt supported Vice Mayor Stone for mayor. He commented that in addition
to having the capability to serve in the role and lead the Council that he had the respect and
trust of colleagues. He voiced that the role went beyond being ceremonial and included setting
agendas; making appointments to committees and liaisons to boards, commissions, and
community organizations, and City representatives to regional bodies; presiding over meetings; 
and leading the Council in productive, focused, inclusive, and efficient discussion. He added
that the mayor was viewed as the political leader of the community.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 08/2024
Council Member Lauing enthusiastically supported Vice Mayor Stone for mayor. He appreciated
his work ethic, insightfulness, and humor. He hoped he would be a role model for the youth in
the community. He regarded him as a good partner to Mayor Kou.   
Mayor Kou expressed that Vice Mayor Stone was ready to be mayor. She stated that it had
been a pleasure working with him. She noted that he was mature beyond his years, an active
participant at Council and committee proceedings, insightful, and provided sound advice and
comments. She discussed him doing a very good job as the liaison to the San Francisco
Community Roundtable addressing airplane noise and emissions. He was also a voice on the
San Francisquito Creek Joint Powers Authority Board. She agreed with Council Member Burt's
comments related to the role of mayor. She summarized that he was strong, fair, and a
community leader. She looked forward to supporting him as mayor.  
Public Comment: 
Aram J. ( Zoom) voiced that Vice Mayor Stone was capable, but he did not support his
nomination. He wanted Council Member Veenker to be mayor.  
Rebecca E. ( Zoom), speaking personally and not as Director of Valley Water, was impressed
with the statements that had been made by Council members. She supported Vice Mayor Stone
for mayor and supported the tradition of vice mayor becoming mayor. She noted that she had
worked with Vice Mayor Stone on the San Francisquito Creek JPA, and he had been a delightful, 
contributing, and positive member of the board and a leader. She hoped Council Member
Veenker could be rewarded with the vice mayor role.  
Lubnaq (Zoom) had comments related to PAUSD and COVID. 
Mayor Kou asked that she make her comments later in the meeting.  
NOMINATION: Council Member Lythcott-Haims nominated Council Member Stone for Mayor
for 2024. 
Interim City Clerk Mahealani Ah Yun took an oral roll call vote for mayor as there was only one
nominee.  
NOMINATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER STONE AS MAYOR FOR 2024 PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no
Mayor Stone thanked everyone for their support and trusting him to lead the City in 2024. He
acknowledged Council Member Kou for her service as mayor in 2023. He voiced that he had
learned much from her, and he would do his best to represent the City as honorably as she had. 
He thanked Council members for having faith in him. He was honored to lead the City and
Council in 2024. He thanked his wife, parents, family, and friends for their patience and his
parents for their sacrifices in making Palo Alto his home. He stated that being chosen as mayor
was the greatest honor of his life. He believed that a title was honorary if it was not used to
better the lives of the people served. He looked forward to working with colleagues, staff, and
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/08/2024
the community to address Palo Alto's greatest challenges, including housing, zoning, climate, 
electrification, the natural environment, economic development, supporting the business
community, and youth mental health and wellbeing. He announced the formation of the Youth
Mental Health and Wellbeing Blue Ribbon Taskforce comprised of key stakeholders in the
nonprofit sector, medical professionals, educators, professionals, student representatives, a
member of the PRC, himself, and Shana Segal, and the taskforce would work together to
articulate key needs and goals, identify gaps in services, and recommend policies and programs
to Council. He was pleased to work with his colleagues in service to the City and residents.  
2. 
Election of the 2024 Vice Mayor
Council Member Burt nominated Council Member Lauing for vice mayor. He thought the new
Council members would be able to lead Council in the next few years. He felt Council Member
Lauing had the experience and understanding of the processes and the issues to step into the
role.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims nominated Council Member Veenker for vice mayor. She
respected Council Member Lauing's service to the City, but she was nominating Council
Member Veenker because she had experience and readiness from serving regionally and
nationally. She noted that she was an attorney, chaired boards, served as general counsel to
boards, chaired meetings of various companies, and had a technical background, and she was
innovative and analyzed every issue to ensure the right things were being considered and that it
would be done justly. She mentioned that she came out in first place when Council members
were last elected. She provided details related to the connections she had outside Palo Alto
that were complementary, strong, and valuable. She voiced that she attended every event. She
respected that she voted her conscious when a mediated outcome could not be reached. She
discussed her having brought a wide array of Palo Alto groups together. She added that she
would bring gender diversity to the role.  
Council Member Lauing thanked Council Member Burt for the nomination, and he explained
why it was meaningful to him. He congratulated Mayor Stone and stated he wanted to work
with and support him. He accepted the nomination as a long-term public servant for Palo Alto
residents. He noted that he had developed a very detailed understanding of the complexities of
the City's protocols, staff, and processes. He promised to hit the ground running if elected. He
detailed that his community service before his work for the City was in leadership roles. He was
offering extensive prior experience in leading a group of colleagues to reach constructive
solutions for the City. He thought he was chosen multiple times by colleagues for commissions
because he was prepared in advance, balanced in approach, and treated all equally. He tried to
lead out of stalemates and toward productive solutions. He was focused on addressing issues at
hand for time management and other reasons. Solutions required more than what would occur
at Council meetings and included pre and post briefings and debriefings, and staff, Council, and
the public were critical components in addressing City issues. He outlined how group members
could demonstrate leadership ability and interest by creating new, productive initiatives that
were not on anyone' s agenda. He commented that working with former Mayor Kou had been
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 08/2024
terrific. He noted that Mayor Stone had a legal background and was a renter, a teacher, and
young, and he, himself, had extensive
business
and operating
experience
and was a
homeowner, an executive recruiter, and older, and he stated that those differences were
complementary to each other. He added that Mayor Stone was a busy teacher and that he, 
himself, had a flexible schedule, which would allow him to step in if needed. He wanted to
focus on funding and executing top priorities.  
Council Member Veenker humbly accepted the nomination but asked to hold her comments
until after public comment. 
Mayor Stone replied that she could comment after public comment.  
Council Member Kou reserved her comments until after public comment.  
Public Comment: 
Cari T., a Planning and Transportation Commissioner, spoke on her personal behalf. She
congratulated Mayor Stone. She thought each Council member was capable of leading the
body. She hoped the legacy would be to ensure the existence of a fair process for future
Councils. She wanted there to be rotation based on objective criteria reflecting the will of the
people. She supported Council Member Veenker for current vice mayor and Council Member
Lauing for the position next year.  
Kathleen F.H., founder and owner of Ada's Café, congratulated Mayor Stone and thanked him, 
former Mayor Kou, and Council members for their service. She supported Council Member
Lauing as vice mayor. She viewed him as having leadership and consensus- building skills and to
be hardworking, honest, a good listener, and transparent.  
Bruce H., from Carbon-Free Palo Alto, enthusiastically supported Council Member Veenker for
vice mayor. He remarked that her commitment to climate issues was solid, and focused
leadership was needed. He stated that she had a proven ability to listen and bring together
divergent viewpoints into a shared understanding of effective solutions.  
Anne C. congratulated Mayor Stone and thanked former Mayor Kou for all she had done. She
was in her third term as the Park and Recreation Commissioner. She supported Council
Member Lauing as vice mayor. She commented that she had worked with him on the PRC, and
he provided great enthusiasm and leadership, listened respectfully to various views, and
encouraged thoughtful discussion while keeping focus on the goal. She added that he was good
at running meetings and understood the importance of community and recreation parks and
open space for all. She thanked Council for their work and commitment to Palo Alto.  
Jennifer D., with PAUSD, spoke for herself. She congratulated Mayor Stone and thanked him
and former Mayor Kou for their service. She was grateful to both nominees. She supported
Council Member Veenker for the role as she was a model of civic diplomacy and was able to
find the path to consensus. She had worked with her on the Sibling City events. She discussed
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/08/2024
the School Board's system for appointments, which she thought was a great systematic way to
do it.  
Liz K. hoped balance, gender, and global experience would be considered, which she explained. 
She thought Council Member Lythcott-Haims rightly described what was needed for the job.  
Jackie W. congratulated Mayor Stone. She supported Council Member Veenker for vice mayor
because she was a strong leader, aggressive on climate action and housing and met regularly
with community leaders on these topics, and supported many organizations and community
programs. She thought there should be diversity on the Council.  
Max G., a junior at Paly, spoke of his experiences with Council Member Veenker. He had
worked with Council Member Veenker and had learned a lot about Council meetings and
agendas and how to organize events. He saw her doing work to make the community a better
place and to help the City and its residents. He urged all to vote for her.  
Winter D. voiced that the position required experience related to the job description. She
supported Council Member Lauing because of his knowledge and experience, which she
summarized. She wanted Council Member Veenker to be elected next time.  
Bryna C., Vice Chair of the PTC, speaking as an individual congratulated Mayor Stone and
thanked former Mayor Kou. She supported Council Member Lauing. She found him to be a
great leader based on the many years she worked with him on the PTC. She was impressed with
how strategic he was, and she appreciated his listening and facilitation skills. She thought his
temperament was uniquely suited to working on City problems because he was patient, 
diplomatic, and service oriented.  
Kaisa G., former Public Engagement Director for the City of Bloomington, Indiana, and a student
at Stanford Law School, spoke in a personal capacity in strong support for Council Member
Veenker for vice mayor because of her qualifications. She worked closely with her on the Sibling
Cities USA Program and voiced that she was an exceptional ambassador for Palo Alto. She was
dedicated
and a talented attorney, mediator, and consensus
builder. She noted that
demographics, gender, race, and others should not be the primary factor in selecting leadership
roles, but representation was important, and there should be diversity of perspectives in life
experiences in leaders.  
Keith R. mentioned that he had worked very closely with Council Member Lauing on the PRC, 
the Housing Element Workgroup, and the PTC. He found him to be very productive, capable, 
patient, and detail oriented and to have a collaborative style, which made others effective. He
highly recommended him for vice mayor.  
Hamilton H. ( Zoom) supported Council Member Lauing for vice mayor. He worked with him
when he was Co-Chair of the Housing Element, and he smoothly ran Zoom meetings with a
diverse set of over 15 folks, and everyone had been granted equal speaking time, and he kept
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/08/2024
everyone on topic and the meetings to time. He found him to be engaged, smart, and
thoughtful.  
Aram J. ( Zoom) supported Council Member Veenker for vice mayor. He noted that he had had a
gentlemanly conversation with Council Member Lauing, but he did not know where he stood on
Israel and a ceasefire, which he wanted to discuss with him in the future. He asked if the
Housing Element had been approved. He noted that he had had many dialogues with Council
Member Veenker.  
Rebecca E., Council' s elected representative on the Santa Clara Valley Water District, was
speaking in a personal capacity and asked that Council Member Lythcott-Haims' comments be
incorporated into her comments. She defined leadership as a combination of integrity and
courage, and effectiveness was also important. Council Member Lauing deserved respect, but
she supported Council Member Veenker. She spoke of her integrity and courage. She served on
an environmental- related commission with her, and she voiced that she was extraordinary, 
brilliant, and the best ally.  
Doria S. ( Zoom), Chair of the Planning Commission, spoke as an individual, enthusiastically
congratulated Mayor Stone and thanked former Mayor Kou for her great work, and she hoped
it would continue. She noted that both nominees were wonderful people, Council members, 
and public servants. She had served for six years on the Planning Commission with Council
Member Lauing, and she described him as being collegial, balanced, fair, a team player, 
respectful, and a problem solver. She thought it was important that he be vice mayor this year, 
and she looked forward to Council Member Veenker being vice mayor next year.  
Julian H., the Student Body President at Palo Alto High School, congratulated Mayor Stone on
his recent election and Council Member Kou for her years of service. He supported Council
Member Veenker for vice mayor. He worked with her in Sibling Cities USA, and he found her to
be a resolute community member and to represent Palo Alto's values and to encourage the
development of Palo Alto's youth. He believed she would nurture the next generation of
leaders. He stated that she tackled issues related to climate and race and belonging.  
Goolrukh V. (Zoom), a local businessperson, congratulated Mayor Stone. She spoke of equality, 
fairness, and compassion, and she hoped the vice mayor would be female. She hoped the
mayor, vice mayor, and Council would addresses the small business situation.  
Council Member Veenker thanked Mayor Stone for allowing her to reserve comment until after
public comment. She was humbled and heartened by the public comments. She remarked that
she had fondness and respect for Council Member Lauing. She thanked the public for attending
and sharing and Council Member Lythcott-Haims for her confidence. She was eager and ready
to take on the role of vice mayor. She mentioned that she had convened a lot of meetings, and
she elaborated on the Sibling Cities meetings, which included race and belonging, climate, and
bridging regional divides. She voiced that it was a privilege to serve on this Council. She detailed
why the City was special. She was eager to seek and realize the potential of Palo Alto, and she
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/08/2024
thought she was situated to do that. She would treasure working with Council no matter what
capacity she did it in. She believed she could amplify the vision of Mayor Stone if she could
become part of the mayor-vice mayor team. Related to Mayor Stone's teaching career, she
noted that she had flexibility in her schedule, and she knew the struggles of owning a home
versus the struggles of renting, and she thought there were complementary assets. She wanted
to lift up Palo Alto, center it, bring in assets, and help Palo Alto iterate beyond its borders. She
would be delighted and honored to have the opportunity.  
Council Member Kou expressed that she had a lot of respect for both nominees. She remarked
that Palo Alto Weekly referred to Council Member Lauing as a City Hall veteran. She added that
he volunteered and contributed his time to support Council for over 15 years as a commissioner
on the PRC and PTC and chaired the respective commissions numerous times. It was critical that
the mayor and vice Mayor have a strong relationship, and she believed Mayor Stone and
Council Member Lauing would work well together as they had already on the Housing Ad Hoc
Committee and the Housing Element Ad Hoc Committee. She displayed the City Palo of Alto
Organizational Chart and outlined how Council Member Lauing had represented the residents. 
She thanked all who spoke on behalf of Council Member Veenker and acknowledged they were
heard, and she stated there would be opportunities for her. Regarding balance, gender, and
global experience, she thought it was about the diverse community of Palo Alto. She felt that
Mayor Stone and Council Member Lauing would provide balance. As for gender, she suggested
there not be deflection from capabilities. She added that Council Member Lauing had a
daughter and granddaughter. She supported the nomination of Council Member Lauing for vice
mayor.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims shared the City Palo of Alto Organizational Chart and noted
that women had been underrepresented in the leadership of Palo Alto until recently. If there
was an opportunity for gender parity when selecting leadership, it seemed logical that it should
be advanced.  
Council Member Veenker had been informed that Kaloma Smith had to leave the meeting and
did not mean any disrespect to the Council.  
Mayor Stone considered this an incredibly difficult vote. He commented that Council Member
Veenker had greatly impressed him, and she was one of the smartest people he knew and one
of the most accomplished attorneys. He would not have felt comfortable stepping into the
position after a year, and he thought experience mattered. He mentioned that Council Member
Lauing had 13-plus years' experience in service to the City as a Parks and Recreation
Commissioner and as a PTC Commissioner, and he had served in leadership as Chair of those
commissions 5 of the 13 years. He felt confident that Council Member Lauing would be able
step in and Chair a meeting, and he had had the trust of colleagues. He imagined that in a year
Council Member Veenker would be supported as vice mayor. He voted for experience at the
City level.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 08/2024
NOMINATION: Council Member Burt nominated Council Member Lauing for Vice Mayor for
2024. 
NOMINATION: Council Member Lythcott-Haims nominated Council Member Veenker for Vice
Mayor for 2024. 
Interim City Clerk Mahealani Ah Yun outlined the voting process.  
First Round of voting for the position of Vice Mayor with term ending December 31, 2024. 
Voting For: 
Ed Lauing
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Stone
Vicki Veenker
Lythcott-Haims, Tanaka, Veenker
NOMINATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER LAUING AS VICE MAYOR FOR 2024 PASSED: 4-3
3. 
Adoption of a Resolution Expressing Appreciation for Outstanding Public Service to Lydia
Kou as 2023 Mayor
Mayor Stone read the resolution. The City Council of the City of Palo Alto honored and
commended former Mayor Lydia Kou for outstanding
public service and recorded the
appreciation
of the Council, residents, and businesses for her meritorious
service and
commitment as a Palo Alto Mayor.  
Public Comment: 
Lori M. remarked that former Mayor Kou led with empathy. She shared a story that occurred
just after October 7 related to the Jewish community and Hamas, and she appreciated her
taking her call and listening to her. She encouraged all to read former Mayor Kou's statement to
City Council. She quoted a statement of Rabbi Jonathan Sacks concerning leadership. She
congratulated Mayor Stone. She thanked every member of Council for all they had done, and
she looked forward to working with them.  
Lynette L. E., a City of Los Altos Council member, spoke as a community member. She stated
that she had had the pleasure of serving with Council Member and former Mayor Kou at VTA
committees, and she found her to be thoughtful and eager to listen and learn, which she
appreciated. They had also worked on diversity, equity, and inclusion matters, and she thanked
her for that. She appreciated her community approach and speaking up for the youth, seniors, 
and those with developmental disabilities. She appreciated her common sense approach based
on reality rather than ideology and party lines. She expressed that Palo Alto had been fortunate
to have her as a mayor and congratulated her on a job well done for 2023. She looked forward
to working with Mayor Stone and Vice Mayor Lauing. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 08/2024
Kilian M., from the Office of County Supervisor Joe Simitian, stated that Mr. Simitian sent his
regrets for not being able to attend the meeting. He thanked former Mayor Kou and Council for
their collaboration with the County in 2023 on a range of issues, and they looked forward to
working with Council in 2024.  
Mora O., Executive Director of Youth Community Service, congratulated Mayor Stone and Vice
Mayor Lauing, and she thanked former Mayor Kou for her service in 2023. She was grateful for
her service last year, and she provided three examples, which included volunteering during the
flooding, inspirational messages, and youth mental health. She thanked Mayor Stone for
continuing the work with youth and helping them through their academics. She added that the
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day of Service event would be on January 15. 
Terry H. congratulated Mayor Stone and thanked him for teaching in the school district. He
congratulated Vice Mayor Lauing. He described former Mayor Kou as one of the most sensitive
and caring individuals ever to serve on Council, who worked diligently and was not afraid to
challenge City staff, and he encouraged all to follow in those footsteps. He mentioned that
former Mayor Kou believed in local government and democracy, and he noted that the City
needed good local political representation.  
Winter D. thanked former Mayor Kou for founding and supporting the diversity events in
Barron Park Neighborhood and for being the pioneer and the foremost advocate for greater
renter protections in Palo Alto. She thanked her for having brought a great deal of heart to
being mayor and for being warm and sweet to people. She congratulated Mayor Stone and Vice
Mayor Lauing.  
Aram J. ( Zoom) congratulated former Mayor Kou for her service and spoke of her graciousness
toward him. He thanked her for her work in emergency services in the City. He requested she
apologize for her comments related to the NAACP. He was disappointed in her actions
concerning a ceasefire in Gaza and asked for her support.  
Darlene
Y., President
and
Cofounder
of Aviation-Impacted
Communities
Alliance
and
Concerned Residents of Palo Alto, congratulated Mayor Stone and Vice Mayor Lauing. She was
thrilled to have worked with former Mayor Kou over many years, and she noted that she did
many spectacular things behind the scenes, and she thanked her.  
Rebecca E. commended and thanked former Mayor Kou for her hard work. She attested to her
integrity, courage, and kindness. She explained that she welcomed their disagreements on
certain issues. She thought her life experiences and being a woman and a person of color
guided her perception in a positive direction. She thanked her for her stance in support of
Jewish Palo Altans.  
Council Member Burt thought everything had been said but not everybody had said it. He
echoed many of the public comments. He commented that former Mayor Kou led with
empathy and caring for community members, which guided everything she did. He thanked her
for her service.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 08/2024
Council Member Veenker admired former Mayor Kou's heart, empathy, compassion, sincere
caring for the community, and her work ethic. She appreciated and thanked her for the way she
had gracefully led Council and for her support and service.  
Vice Mayor Lauing appreciated former Mayor Kou's Organizational Chart. He believed she was
very resident focused and fought for them. He remarked that the City benefitted from her
sacrifices and all the work she did. He believed she had led the Council with grace, courage, and
a strong gavel at the right times under some very difficult circumstances. He was proud that she
had been mayor and that he worked with her, and he thanked her.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims joined her colleagues and the residents in the accolades for
former Mayor Kou. She felt welcomed by her when she was sworn in as a Council member. She
stated that her leadership encouraged Council to be a congenial group and to prioritize doing
what was best for the City. She saluted and appreciated her and was grateful for her leadership. 
Council Member Tanaka thanked former Mayor Kou for her service. Despite disagreements, she
always tried to give people equal airtime, which he felt was important. He believed her heart
was in the right place. He saw her as a hard worker. He thought the City was better off because
of her having been mayor.  
Mayor Stone stated that former Mayor Kou's leadership spoke volumes to who she was. He felt
safe with her leadership when the Zoombombing occurred a couple months ago, which she
handled with grace and courage. He spoke of the massive storms about a year ago and her
filling sandbags, etc., and then after the storms, she (in person) checked on residents impacted
by the floods, and she did not contact the press or make social media posts for political
advantage. He declared that she did it because she was a good person. He was grateful that she
would be on Council for another year. He thanked her for her leadership.  
Council Member Kou thanked everyone for attending the meeting and for the wonderful
comments. She discussed that she started her position as mayor with the storms that led to
flooding, which was a realization that all had a part in ensuring safety of lives, homes, and
businesses. She spoke of work being done by Public Works and residents to address the
flooding in the neighborhoods to ensure safety and health. She voiced that with the addition of
new Council members she had to incorporate their different work styles, which involved a lot of
listening, observing, and learning, and she thanked Council Member Veenker, Vice Mayor
Lauing, and Council Member Lythcott-Haims for that opportunity. She addressed the extremely
high utility bills for gas and electric, and she spoke of having attended the National League of
Cities conference in Washington, D.C., to advocate and lobby, and she had asked for an
investigation with regard to the City's experience with natural gas price hikes, and the
investigation could take over a year, and she would continue to monitor that. At that
conference, she also discussed the City's funding and policy priorities, including the City's
congressionally directed spending request for infrastructure funding to help in redeveloping the
Buena Vista Mobile Home Park, which would be forthcoming, and grade separation projects
and airplane noise issues impacting the City, and she had shared the City's priorities and
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 08/2024
obtained information about available resources for transportation infrastructure projects as a
result of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. On behalf of the City of Palo Alto, she thanked
Townsend
Political Agency for helping her arrange the meetings
she attended at the
conference. She addressed mourning those who lost their lives in mass shootings, and
encouraged better control of gun laws. She thanked the natural environmentalists
who
advocated for the Bay and marshlands to act as the critical barriers between rising tides and
homes to protect against flooding, etc. She discussed the privilege of meeting President Joe
Biden. She noted that a picture had been taken after the meeting, and President Biden made
certain that she was included in the picture. She mentioned that he was observant, kind, 
thoughtful, and intelligent. She thanked Neighbors Abroad for the opportunity to work with
them. She thanked John St. Clair III for accompanying her to events, who was a perfect first
gentleman. She asked that assistance be given to the new first lady. She was grateful that La
Comida had a space at Avenidas, but she would continue to be involved in ensuring unbiased
treatment of all seniors. She believed there was work to be done in economic development, 
especially developing a strategic plan. She stated the City's Organizational Chart was a reminder
that the work being done was for Palo Alto's residents. She thanked the neighbor associations, 
Palo Alto Neighborhoods, and all associations in the city. She remarked that the residents were
building the community, and she would continue to fight for people' s voices and be a fierce
advocate to preserve democracy or a foe of Sacramento' s overreach. She thanked the City Clerk
and her office, the City Manager and his office and departments, the City Attorney and her
office, and all the lead department chiefs and directors for their support of her mayorship. 
Concerning hate speeches and divisiveness, including tragedies and atrocities happening in the
world, she reminded all of the resolution introduced and passed on December 12, 2016, to
reaffirm Palo Alto's commitment to a diverse, supportive, inclusive, and protective community, 
which she recited. She thanked all for the honor of being mayor in 2023 and for trusting her.  
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to adopt
a resolution expressing appreciation to Lydia Kou as 2023 Mayor. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
Mayor Stone suggested a photo be taken of City Council with former Mayor Kou displaying the
resolution, and the photo was taken.  
The Council took a 10-minute break]  
Mayor Stone announced that speaker time would be limited to 1 minute per speaker due to
there being 46 speakers. He also declared that the agenda did not include a ceasefire resolution
or any resolution related to the conflict, nor did any future agenda. He recognized it was an
emotionally charged subject. He respectfully reminded everyone that peaceful expressions of
opinions were allowed, but he would not tolerate bullying or jeering, and if anyone disrupted
the meeting, they would be asked to leave. To ensure that everyone felt safe and not
intimidated, he asked that there be no applause or jeering after speakers. He declared this
would be a safe space for expressing views.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 08/2024
Public Comment
Rebecca
S. thanked
Council Member Kou and Council members for their service and
congratulated Mayor Stone and Vice Mayor Lauing. She discussed building community and
suggested there be a resolution for a ceasefire in the Hamas-Israel war. She encouraged there
be no proposals moved forward that could fracture the community. 
Noel S. thanked Mayor Stone for the ground rules. He asked that a motion for a ceasefire in
Gaza be put on the agenda.  
Thomas T. begged Council to enact a ceasefire resolution now.  
Michelle H. provided names of some of the Palestinian children who lost their lives. She asked
Council to urgently agendize and pass a ceasefire resolution.  
Talha B. thought it was important that Palo Alto send a message that it did not support the war
but instead supported humanity.  
Lori M. mourned the life of innocent people. She explained why she was grateful that no action
had been taken by Council related to a ceasefire, and she asked that Council continue what
they were doing.  
Allyson R. was grateful for the Council Member Kou's statement about the October 7 events. 
She did not support a ceasefire. She noted that federal government was responsible for foreign
policy, not city government. She looked forward to the leadership of Mayor Stone and Vice
Mayor Lauing.  
Soneida D.C. pleaded that Council pass a resolution for a permanent ceasefire in Palestine. She
stated that criticism of a government was a healthy sign of democracy, not a threat. She asked
Council to use their influence until those who could end the cycle of trauma used theirs.   
Zach M. urged Council to not introduce any resolution related to a ceasefire in the Israel-Hamas
war. He asked that the focus be on the business of Palo Alto.  
Sheree R. thanked Council for their work in keeping the city safe, clean, and friendly. She
trusted that Council would continue to focus on City business and avoid foreign policy issues, 
such as a ceasefire resolution, which she felt would create division.  
Brian L. urged Council to call for a ceasefire in Gaza.  
Jessica K. indicated that calling for a ceasefire was not radicle but was the bare minimum, and
she begged Council to open a resolution for a ceasefire now.  
Sabah I. urged Council to call for an immediate and permanent ceasefire in Palestine.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 08/2024
Pamela M. asked Council to pressure Congress to demand a permanent and immediate
ceasefire by adopting a local ceasefire resolution. She begged Council to act on their words of
racial and social justice.  
Layan S. quoted from a plaque she had seen when she walked into chambers, which she
expected Council to uphold – Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. She urged
Council to pressure Congress to demand a permanent ceasefire to allow all humanitarian aid to
enter Gaza.  
Sofia S. H. asked if her elected officials stood for human rights and if they would use their
platform to do so. She requested there be a resolution calling for ceasefire. 
Leila T. requested there be a ceasefire resolution agendized for the next City Council meeting.  
Rupini demanded a ceasefire resolution now. She discussed hearings that would begin in the ICJ
related to South Africa and Israel. She asked that Council not remain silent.  
Estee G. asked that Council not introduce any resolution related to a ceasefire in the Israel-
Hamas war. She indicated that it was a complicated geopolitical issue. She suggested Council
address issues in Palo Alto.  
Kunal S. asked Council to oppose the war.  
Avroh S., a representative of PASSC, appreciated Council' s work toward 80% GHG emissions
reductions. He requested climate change for sustainability be the number-one priority for 2024.  
Julia Z., Cofounder of the PASSC, thanked Council for their leadership and care for the
community. They honored and appreciated the sustainability work that had been done in the
past year; approval of the S/ CAP through the workplan and a carbon neutrality by 2030 goal; 
the progress made on the Heat Pump Water Heater Program; and the continued leadership of
Council Members Veenker and Burt on the S/ CAP Ad-Hoc Committee. She asked Council to
reinforce prioritization and support bold climate action for 2024 and to create new timelines.  
You-lo Z. voiced that he had witnessed racial hate and asked what would be done about it.  
Regina S. requested Council pass a ceasefire resolution. She read a statement she received from
a neighbor that she considered to be a threat.  
Boris indicated that any calls for an absolute ceasefire would cause more conflict.  
Alina D. congratulated Mayor Stone. She requested a ceasefire resolution.  
Fred B. congratulated Mayor Stone and Vice Mayor Lauing. He stated that he would post
comments in Town Square in response to an article that was in The Weekly. He thanked Council
for allowing so many speakers, and he was happy they were here.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 08/2024
Sebastien D. explained why he was asking Council to not call for a ceasefire resolution. He
requested that Council help Palo Alto continue to be a diverse, inclusive community.  
Lynn ( Zoom) discussed why she urged Council to not call for a ceasefire resolution. She
indicated that, per Council' s charter, Council was tasked with acting on matters only when
necessary and appropriate for the general welfare of Palo Alto residents, and opining on a war
was outside the Council’ s charter and purview.  
Aram J. ( Zoom) suggested a ceasefire resolution be put on the agenda for a discussion and a
decision.  
Makenzie H. (Zoom) opposed Council remaining silent concerning a ceasefire. She asked that
Council stand by the values of the HRC and the City of Palo Alto and agendize a ceasefire
resolution immediately.  
Rsm (Zoom) explained why she felt Council could be considered racist in relation to the war.  
Deborahlise M. had a doctorate in post-traumatic and indigenous medicines, and she thought
current events were causing trauma. She wanted to support Mayor Stone in some type of work
to help the community.   
Syed (Zoom) spoke of Resolution 7715 and asked for a ceasefire resolution.  
Lubnaq (Zoom) congratulated Mayor Stone and Vice Mayor Lauing. She asked if time had been
taken to consider what the children of Gaza were experiencing, including hunger, mental
health, etc.   
Ceasefire ( Zoom) indicated there was a moral obligation to call for a ceasefire now, which she
elaborated on. She requested that a ceasefire be supported now.   
Herschel ( Zoom) asked that a ceasefire resolution not be introduced. He indicated it would not
be inclusive or unifying but would cause more division. He thanked Council for their service and
congratulated Mayor Stone and Vice Mayor Lauing.  
David Z. (Zoom) claimed that a statement by Council in support of a ceasefire was a statement
in support of humanity.  
Sarit S. ( Zoom) asked that Council not bring a ceasefire resolution to Palo Alto. She claimed that
it would have no impact on the war but would sow hatred and division locally. She thanked
Council for leading with empathy and continuing to build inclusion and unity in Palo Alto.  
CC (Zoom) requested an immediate ceasefire resolution. 
Mm238 (Zoom) asked Council to not call for a ceasefire. He opined that it would have no impact
on the war in the Middle East but would sow hatred and division and possibly create an unsafe
environment.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 16
City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 08/2024
Mo H ( Zoom) did not know why a ceasefire resolution might cause controversy or divide
opinions. He urged Council to add a ceasefire resolution to the agenda.  
Fatima A.W. ( Zoom) would attend every meeting to speak about humanity and justice. She
asked that the Muslim and Jewish people be fought for equally in Palo Alto and to keep the
community safe.  
Rebecca E. called for common ground. She grieved for every lost life.  
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 9:36 P.M.  
