CITY COUNCIL & PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 15
Special Meeting
February 5, 2024
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:30 p.m. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely:  
Absent:  
Call to Order
Mayor Stone called the City Council Meeting to order. 
Special Orders of the Day
1. 
Santa Clara County 2023 Synopsys Championship Science Fair 2023 STEM Winners from
Palo Alto
No action was taken. 
Mayor Stone congratulated Palo Alto STEM winners who then took photos with the Council at
the dais and received a proclamation from the City. 
SCVSEFA Board Member Forrest Williams congratulated students as well as thanked Mayor
Stone, Council Members and staff. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked that the Synopsys Championship Science Fair proclamation
was one of his favorites and thanked students for their innovations. 
Closed Session
AA1.  CONFERENCE
WITH
REAL
PROPERTY
NEGOTIATORS
Authority: Government
Code
Section 54956.8 Property: 4000 Middlefield Road, Palo Alto (Informally known as the
Cubberley Site) Negotiating Party: Palo Alto Unified School District City Negotiators: ( Ed
Shikada, Chantal Cotton Gaines, Kristen O'Kane, Sunny Tong) Subject of Negotiations: 
Purchase, Exchange, and/ or Lease Price and Terms of Payment
Public Comment: Ken H. showed slides of other campus centers. The Menlo Park Community
Center opens in a couple months in the Belle Haven area and was an all-electric, zero
combustion, net-zero energy project with onsite renewable energy, battery microgrid, electric
vehicle charging stations, two swimming pools and its structural design was resilient to serve as
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
an emergency shelter. It cost about $ 40 million and about five years to construct. Mountain
View’s Community Center was approximately 36,000 square feet, cost about $ 35 million and
took about five years to build. Ken H. believed it was time to make a decision on Cubberley and
build a community center by 2030. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Veenker to go into Closed
Session. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
Council went into Closed Session at 5:51 p.m. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 7:00 p.m. 
Mayor Stone announced no reportable action. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
None
Public Comment
1. 
Talha B. spoke on behalf of Tuba S., Yasa B., Noiez B., Talha A, Hadi S., Aziz S., Amir M., 
and Humza S. Slide presentation and video shown titled “Palestine: The Most Dangerous
Place to be a Child.” 
2. 
Sarit S. spoke on behalf of Adele G., Jafi L., Estee G., Linor L., Ilene S., Rebecca S., Tal S., 
Julia F., Josh L., Inbal S., Rotem P., Tzippi Z., Miriam R., Sarah G., and Sarith H. Slide
presentation shown regarding the war in Gaza. 
3. 
Yazan A. spoke on behalf of Uzma, Michelle, Makenzie, Jessica, Thomas, Tuba, and
Yafang regarding all human lives matter equally, wanting liberty and justice for all. He
grew up in Palestine of mixed faith (Christian and Muslim) and was a proud American
citizen. He called for peace, read Matthew 5:9, “ Blessed are the peacemakers for they
are the children of God” and requested a moment of silence for dying children. 
4. 
Noel S. requested Council to pass a ceasefire resolution. 
5. 
Giora T. commented that Council could not mitigate suffering in the Middle East, 
shorten hostilities or free hostages but Council had the power to maintain harmony in
Palo Alto and keep its citizens free. 
6. 
Allyson R. remarked that the tension and anger was heartbreaking. She opined that
ceasefire resolutions do not belong in the City Council. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
7. 
Henrietta C. has been a Palo Alto resident for 17 years. She was worried about the
growing signs of antisemitism in Palo Alto since October 7. She was afraid of walking the
streets wearing anything that would identify her as a Jew. She was concerned that a City
Council resolution regarding the war in Israel could normalize antisemitism. 
8. 
Alan C. has been a Palo Alto resident since 1980. He noted that last week dozens of anti-
Israel protestors shouted at candidates and members of the audience for 45 minutes. 
He thought the protestors should have been escorted out of the room because
democracy cannot be maintained if protestors were allowed to drown out free speech. 
He thought police should have enforced Section 403 of the California Penal Code, which
states every person who without authority of law willfully disturbs or breaks up an
assembly or meeting that is not unlawful in character is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
9. 
Itai D. stated all lives matter. He wanted peace and harmony in his community. He
believed everyone would support peace but not a ceasefire. 
10. 
Ali and his wife were born in Palo Alto. He is the father of three children. Council’ s
actions affect how safe they feel in Palo Alto. He urged City Council to vote for peace
and pass a ceasefire resolution. 
11. 
Deborahlise spoke against Israel’s actions and stated she stands with Palestine. 
12. 
Jessie H. demanded the addition of a ceasefire resolution to the agenda and was in favor
of Free Palestine. 
13. 
Sehili stated Palo Alto Jews were joining IDF. 
14. 
Alina has lived here for nine years. She spoke against Israel and was for Free Palestine. 
15. 
Marilyne U. was scared for Muslims and Jews. She is a Jew who grew up in a Muslim
country but never experienced the amount of fear and discomfort she now experienced
in the streets of Palo Alto and fear for children in schools. She did not think City Council
should take a strong stand against or for a ceasefire. She wanted people to understand
and respect each other. 
16. 
Heba asked the City Council to call for a ceasefire in Gaza. 
17. 
Thomas T. wanted the City Council to call for a ceasefire and come up with a solution. 
Not doing anything was tearing our community apart and he believed it would continue
if Council stayed silent. 
18. 
Aram J. stated he was a Jewish man. He spoke against Council Member Lythcott-Haims’ 
newsletter article regarding conditions to a ceasefire. He urged Council to call for a
unilateral ceasefire today to stop the killing. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
19. 
Lori M. thought a City Council call for a ceasefire would make no difference in Gaza but
would fracture the community in Palo Alto. The ceasefire resolution in Santa Cruz
resulted in a death threat to the Mayor. Jews were mocked with pig noises in San
Francisco. 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements
Vice Mayor Lauing announced City Auditor Adriane McCoy left the firm. Council will meet in
closed session over the next couple of weeks to interview candidates from the firm. 
Council Member Kou provided a Retail Ad Hoc Committee report. The City set up meetings with
business merchants. Merchants stated there were issues the City had not resolved. Meetings
with California Avenue merchants were held on December 19 and January 30. Discussion
included El Camino Real beautification, the entrance to California Avenue, more signage
directing parking within the California Avenue area, bollards and aesthetics. Merchants needed
to plan Third Thursday events together as well as have regulations on music volume and
placement of bands. Merchants did not know who to call or where to go for information on
code compliance complaints. The City needed to ensure enforcement and fairness of parklets. 
Council Member Kou wanted the City Council to discuss these items as well as mid-term and
long-term proposals for the business districts. 
Council Member Kou met with the Midtown Business District, who was very thankful for staff
and the Palo Alto Chamber of Commerce supporting the holiday scavenger hunt and party. It
was encouraging to see the interaction and collaboration of business owners and the Midtown
Residents Association to revitalize Midtown’ s Business District. The City put up banners along
the Middlefield
businesses
area. Council Member Kou thanked staff for their support, 
coordination and action. Country Sun was purchased and was in operation; Council Member
Kou was happy to note that Palo Alto would retain that business. 
Council Member Veenker reported the Climate Action Ad Hoc met on Friday with the Bay Area
Air Quality Management District to discuss the working group for no-NOx appliance rules and
Palo Alto’s Heat Pump Water Heater Program. 
Vice Mayor Lauing pointed out that the motion to authorize the Retail Ad Hoc in August
included staff returning to Council for a discussion of near and medium-term initiatives. He
thought staff should agendize that soon so Council could hear their report. Vice Mayor Lauing
was concerned that retailers on California Avenue were operating off a pandemic parklet
program without any guidelines on the change. There was urgency for retailers to have specific
directions on what they can do because there were violations. The entrance to California
Avenue was not inviting. Council’ s discussion in November included doing some things in the
short term but many of those things were not done. He hoped the Council could work with
staff, retailers and the Committee to make those things happen. 
Consent Calendar
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 10. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Numbers 4, 5, 6. 
Mayor Stone, Vice Mayor Lauing, Council Member Kou and Council Member Veenker requested
to pull Agenda Item Number 7. City Manager Ed Shikada stated staff would schedule Item
Number 7 on an upcoming agenda, tentatively on March 4. 
Council Member Tanaka, Council Member Lythcott-Haims, Council Member Veenker and Mayor
Stone requested to pull Agenda Item Number 8. 
Public Comment: Regarding Item 8, John K. noted a number of statements in the staff report for
January 16 that last year’s storms were unusual. The storms recently experienced show that
severe rains and winds were the new normal. He thought the ordinance should create
incentives for the type of conduct you want to increase, particularly incentives favoring
cooperation with organizations such as Canopy to extend and replant trees. Staff stated several
times during the January 16 meeting that this ordinance specifically excluded accessory
dwelling units (ADUs) but that was not in the text of the ordinance. He asked to pull Item 8 off
tonight’ s agenda and for staff to clarify the text in the ordinance about ADUs. 
Council Member Kou objected to by-right zoning approvals as well as the lack of proper analysis
of impacts to the environment and local resources in Item 10. She believed the addendum to
the City’s Comprehensive Plan Environmental Report was insufficient. 
Council Member Tanaka voted no on spending an additional $ 170,000 of taxpayer money for
Utility bill marketing because AI such as DALL-E 3 could create free great graphics. He
questioned the need to spend money on marketing when Palo Alto had a utility monopoly. 
Council Member Tanaka had financial and environmental
concerns with the substantial
increase to the Infosend contract from $ 255,000 to $555,000 in Item 5. More printing and
shipping conflicted with the City’s environmental goals. On Item 6, Council Member Tanaka
voted against the HdL contract because of the 12% annual increase in fees. Businesses were
financially struggling and closing on University Avenue and California Avenue but the City’s fees
increased from $20,000 to $117,000. 
2. 
Approval of Minutes from January 16, 2024 Meeting
3. 
Review and Acceptance of Annual Report on Development Impact Fees for Fiscal Year
2023 and Adoption of a Resolution Making Statutory Findings for Certain Funds. CEQA
status - Not a Project. 
4. 
Approval
of Amendment
Number
1 to Contract
Number
S21180652
With
Eric
Gouldsberry Art Design ( EGAD), in the Amount of $170,000 for Graphic Design Services
to Extend the Term for Additional Two Years; for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of
410,000 over the Five-year Term; CEQA Status – Not a Project
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
5. 
Approval of Amendment No. 2 to Contract S23184693 with Infosend, Inc. for Printing
Services for the Utilities Department Programs and Projects to add $300,000 for a New
Total Not to Exceed Amount of $555,000, and to Amend the Schedule of Rates. CEQA
status: not a project. 
6. 
Approval of Contract No. C23187298C with Hinderliter, de Llamas, and Associates ( HdL) 
for Business Tax and Business Registry Certificate Program Fee Consulting Services in a
Total Not-To-Exceed Amount of $860,555 Over a Three-Year Term; CEQA Status – Not a
Project
7. 
SECOND READING: Adopt Ordinances Amending Planned Community Ordinance 2343
for 2901-2905 Middlefield Road and Establishing a Separate Planned Community Zoning
Designation for 702 Ellsworth Place to Enable the Development of a new Single-Story, 
Single-Family Residence. CEQA Status -- Categorically Exempt Under CEQA Guidelines
Sections 15061(b)(3), 15301, and 15303 (FIRST READING: December 11, 2023 PASSED 6-
0-1, Veenker absent) 
8. 
SECOND READING: Ordinance of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Amending Chapter
8.04 ( Street, Trees, Shrubs, and Plants) and Chapter 8.10 ( Tree Preservation and
Management Regulations) ( FIRST READING: January 16, 2024 PASSED 5-2, Lythcott-
Haims, Tanaka no) 
9. 
SECOND READING: Adopt an Ordinance to Expand the Public Art Commission ( PAC) from
Five to Seven Members (FIRST READING: January 16, 2024 PASSED 7-0) 
10. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of an Ordinance Amending Palo Alto Municipal Code Title
18 ( Zoning) Chapters 18.14 ( Housing Incentives), 18.76 ( Permits and Approvals), and
18.77 (Processing of Permits and Approvals) to Implement Housing Element Program 1.3
Creating By-Right Zoning Approval for Specific Housing Element Inventory Sites. CEQA
Status: An Addendum to the City’s Comprehensive Plan Environmental Impact Report
was Prepared for the 2023-2031 Housing Element. ( FIRST READING: January 22, 2024
PASSED 6-1, Kou no) 
11. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of an Ordinance Authorizing the Improvements to the Palo
Alto Baylands as Part of the Horizontal Levee Pilot Project and Approval of a Cooperative
Agreement with the Association of Bay Area Governments to Construct the Horizontal
Levee Pilot Project ( WQ-22001); CEQA – exempt under Section 15133 ( FIRST READING: 
January 22, 2024 PASSED 7-0) 
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Lauing to approve Agenda
Item Numbers 2-6, 9-11; and pull Agenda Item Numbers 7 and 8 off Consent. 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 2-3, 9, 11: 7-0
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 4-6: 6-1, Tanaka no
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
MOTION PASSED ITEM 10: 6-1, Kou no
City Manager Comments
City Manager Ed Shikada recognized crews and first responders, particularly Public Works and
Utilities staff, who worked around the clock in response to tree issues and power outages
during yesterday’ s storm event. Crews responded to over 100 tree-related issues. Foothills
Nature Preserve experienced winds up to 65 mph. He encouraged members of the community
to call 311 to report issues requiring follow-up. 
Go to cityofpaloalto. org/news for information on community events. 
Staff was contacting business and property owners in Downtown/ University Avenue, Midtown
and Cal Ave regarding the Public Art Program’ s Call for Walls for public art murals. 
The Utilities Department is conducting outreach and using promotional materials to ensure
local businesses are aware of opportunities to save money on rates and energy rebates. 
Next week’s Council Meeting includes a Resiliency and Reliability Plan study session, SB9
projects and midyear budget review as well as a closed session for a follow-up discussion on
Cubberley. On February 26, changes to the Council Procedures and Protocol Handbook will be
discussed. The March 4 meeting agenda includes Council priority objectives and standing
committee work plans. The item deferred from this evening’ s Consent Agenda related to the
tree ordinance will be rescheduled. 
Mayor Stone expressed appreciation of staff’s efforts yesterday during the storm in attempting
to keep most of Palo Alto’s lights on and the streets cleared. 
RECESS
CITY
COUNCIL
MEETING
AND
CONVENE
PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENT
CORPORATION
MEETING
Board Members Present:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Action Items
12. 
Approval of Fiscal Year 2023 Palo Alto Public Improvement
Corporation' s Annual
Financial Report. CEQA Status - Not a Project
Administrative Services Assistant Director Christine Paras explained the Public Improvement
Corporation ( PIC) was a nonprofit led by the City Council and enabled the City to issue
certificates of participation to finance capital projects. PIC had three outstanding debts totaling
144.7 million. The City’s external auditor, MGO, audited PIC’s financial statements and issued
a clean audit opinion. Staff was seeking Council’ s approval of statements. 
Public Comment: 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
1. 
Rex Y. expressed racial comments. Mayor Stone asked the City Clerk to shut off the
speaker and stated those statements did not represent the values of Palo Alto. 
2. 
Ursula H. hoped the PIC could take into account the racial comments expressed. Mayor
Stone called it heinous hate speech far off topic from the item under discussion. Mayor Stone
apologized to the community, colleagues and staff who had to hear racist and ignorant
comments that were abhorrent and do not reflect the values of this community. 
Board Member Tanaka was uncomfortable with the PIC because it seemed to him as a way for
the City to avoid going to the voters for bond funding and he requested an explanation. 
Assistant Director Paras explained the PIC was in alignment with federal tax income laws per
the IRS Revenue Code and was a valid structure for the City to lease assets from the PIC as a
form of debt financing. Board Member Tanaka opined that worthwhile projects should go
directly to the voters for bond approval. City Manager Ed Shikada remarked this was a common
method of financing used by local governments in California. 
Board Member Burt clarified a certificate of participation was the City borrowing money and
using existing revenues to pay back over time. A general obligation bond was new revenue. The
City goes to voters to seek new revenue but not to borrow for a project the City pays back with
existing revenue. Board Member Burt expressed his objection to Board Member Tanaka’ s
characterization of the City’s actions. 
MOTION: Board Member Burt moved, seconded by Board Member Kou to approve the Fiscal
Year (FY) 2023 Annual Financial Report for the Palo Alto Public Improvement Corporation. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no
RECONVENE CITY COUNCIL MEETING
Mayor Stone adjourned the PIC Board Meeting, reconvened the City Council Meeting and noted
all Council Members were present. 
Council took a break and will reconvene at 8:40 p.m. 
Action Items
13. 
Policy and Services Committee Recommendations for Changes to the City Council
Procedures and Protocols Handbook based on Prior City Council Referrals ( Continued
from December 18, 2023). CEQA Status - Not a Project. 
Deputy City Manager Chantal Cotton-Gains proposed the following recommendations: 
Procedures Section 1.1 Annual Organization of City Council. The Policy and Services Committee
wanted the City Council to consider a different process for selecting the Mayor. Option A was to
pursue a ballot measure in 2024 to extend the mayoral term or directly elect the mayor. Option
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
B was to add criteria to Procedures and Protocols. Option C was no change to Procedures
Section 1.1. 
Procedures Section 5.1a(4) Video Participation for Public Comment. This gives members of the
public the opportunity to activate their video during their public comments, which required
staff training to implement. 
Consider adoption of proposed language for Procedures
Section 8.2 Censure Language
Handbook Pages 35-39), Protocols Section 2.2 Refrain from Lobbying Board and Commission
Members (Handbook Page 45), and Protocols Section 2.8 The Role of Council Liaison to Boards
or Commissions ( Handbook Page 46). 
Protocols Section 4.1 International Travel. Language on Handbook Page 48 summarizes the
criteria the Policy and Services Committee recommended related to international travel by City
Council Members. The staff report noted this was an additional $40,000 per year and increasing
by CPI, which was an error. The recommendation reflected in the proposed text changes was
for the total
Council
budget for international
and domestic
travel to increase
from
approximately $ 30,000 or $35,000 to $40,000, in addition to a yearly increase by CPI. 
Public Comment: 
1. 
Bing W. has lived in Palo Alto for about 17 years. She was in support of a longer
mayorship term (at least two years if not a four-year term) to provide the opportunity for more
engagement with the community and staff, have more impact and continuance. She worked
with more than five mayors during her time with Neighbors Abroad. 
2. 
Sunnyvale Mayor Larry Klein was Sunnyvale’ s last two-year selected mayor and first
directly elected mayor. In 1987, a two-year selected mayor to help the City have a better
regional voice was approved by 79% of Sunnyvale residents. In 2020, having a directly elected
mayor passed by 61%. The positives for longer mayor terms were having a very good regional
voice and a better relationship with the City Manager on the issues to move forward. Sunnyvale
decided on a limit of three maximum four-year terms with a maximum of eight years in one
position (two terms as Council Member and one term as Mayor or one term as Council Member
and two terms as Mayor). 
3. 
Aram J. condemned the racism and hate speech heard tonight. The ability to make
virtual public comments was important for those who cannot attend in person. 
4. 
Gulled A. wanted to comment on a ceasefire and allowing the public to speak regardless
of the negativity of their comments. Mayor Stone pointed out that Council moved past Public
Comment and was on Action Item 13, Council Procedures and Protocols Handbook. 
6. 
Winter D. stated that Palo Alto had a regional voice on the many committees and
boards the City Council served on. She opined that longer terms might discourage some from
serving as mayor because of the amount of work. She was in favor of continuing the practice of
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
City Council voting for a mayor to serve a one-year term. Regarding Protocols Section 2.8, The
Role of Council Liaison to Boards or Commissions, she had seen Council Member liaisons
participate as if they were serving on that board or commission and making recommendations
the City Council had not decided on, which she believed was inappropriate. 
Council discussed Procedures Section 1.1: Annual Organization of City Council. 
Council Member Burt saw pros and cons to each approach but did not think there was a need
to change the current process. 
Council Member Kou agreed with Council Member Burt and did not think a directly elected
mayor was necessary. She welcomed discussion on term lengths of two or three years to allow
participation in regional boards. 
Mayor Stone showed slides on how local cities chose their Mayor. Palo Alto’s City Manager
form of government would remain unchanged regardless of how the mayor was chosen. The
mayor was not a full-time position and the role would function the same way as it does now. 
Mayor Stone was in favor of having a directly elected mayor. He believed it was better for
democracy to give residents the choice. Having a term of two or four years gives the mayor
more time and power to build stronger relationship with other cities, regional and national
bodies as well as provides more continuity, stability and balance. He opined it was a dramatic
change for the staff and public to have a new mayor so frequently. 
In Santa Clara County, six cities had a directly elected mayor, four cities have four-year terms
Sunnyvale, Santa Clara, Gilroy and San Jose) and two cities had two-year terms (Milpitas and
Morgan Hill). Nine cities had a Council-selected mayor for a one-year term ( Campbell, 
Cupertino, Los Altos, Los Altos Hills, Los Gatos, Monte Sereno, Mountain View, Palo Alto and
Saratoga). 
In San Mateo County, three cities had a directly elected mayor (four-year term in Half Moon
Bay, three-year term in San Bruno and two-year term in Belmont). Seventeen cities had a
Council-selected mayor; all for a one-year term except Redwood City had a two-year term. 
Council Member Veenker supported continuity, having more regional clout and letting
residents choose the mayor. She attended the U.S. Conference of Mayors (USCM) and saw the
national conversation amongst cities. USCM was highly respected but Palo Alto did not have a
voice because every year we have a new mayor. Council Member Veenker showed a chart
depicting the population size and budget of cities with directly elected mayors, five bigger and
five smaller than Palo Alto, two cities had a larger budget. She preferred a four-year term for
continuity but invited Council Members to share their opinion on term length. 
With three new mayors in the last three years, Vice Mayor Lauing noted City business
continued the next day, it was a peaceful transfer of power and priorities were the same. He
opined there was nothing to gain with longer terms. He pointed out that the House of
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
Representatives and the Senate elected their leaders. Council could select the mayor for a
second term or it could be set up as a two-year term but Vice Mayor Lauing did not want a
ballot measure. Longer terms reduced the opportunity for more people to serve as mayor and
decreased diversity. Traditionally, Council-selected mayors were vice mayors, so they had
received training and were well prepared. A directly elected mayor could be anybody, a new
resident or someone with no experience. 
If Council chose a longer term for the mayor position, Council Member Lythcott-Haims was in
favor of voters selecting a mayor who reflected the priorities that voters care about most. 
Mayor Stone asked staff about requiring a minimum qualification of experience as a council
member to run and serve as mayor. City Attorney Molly Stump had to confirm but she believed
charter cities could establish its own criteria. 
Mayor Klein stated Sunnyvale’ s only conditions for a directly elected mayor were the standard
Council conditions. He did not know of any City with a requirement for experience. He opined if
you allow voters to choose the mayor that they would try to choose the best person. 
Council Member Tanaka believed it was good to allow voters to make the decision. People
commented to him the reason they preferred a directly elected mayor was for continuity. 
Regarding requirements, Council Member Tanaka thought it was better to keep it simple. 
Council Member Kou liked allowing voters to decide the mayor, although she had concerns
about term lengths. Being a mayor and new council member takes knowledge and time to
learn, so she highly recommended adding to the Charter a requirement for a minimum of two
years’ experience as a council member before running for mayor. 
City Manager Ed Shikada remarked the estimated cost per the Registrar of Voters was $200,000
to place the measure on the ballot, which needed to be included in budgetary planning. 
MOTION: Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member Veenker to:  
1. Procedures Section 1.1: Annual Organization of City Council
a. Direct staff to return to City Council with information to pursue a ballot measure
for 2024 to ask the voters if they would like to have a directly elected mayor or
not. The term would be for 2 or 4 years. 
i. Create an ad hoc that could work with staff to develop the specifics to
return to Council with the draft Charter Amendment by June 2024. 
MOTION PASSED: 5-2, Lauing and Burt no
Council discussed Procedures Section 5.1a(4): Video Participation for Public Comment. Council
Member Burt moved the Policy and Services Committee recommendation to allow video
participation. Council Member Lythcott-Haims seconded the motion. Council Member Veenker
had concerns about video participation. Council Member Tanaka voiced his support for the
motion. Mayor Stone asked if a speaker displayed an inappropriate image if the Chair could ask
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
the Clerk to turn off the camera. City Attorney Stump replied the video could be turned off if
there was explicit sexual material; however, the City would have a more difficult time
disallowing video images classified as bias or hate if those views were not reflected in the
comments. Mayor Stone heard disturbing experiences from other elected leaders in the region
of Zoom commenters displaying explicit material in the background, exhibiting themselves in an
inappropriate way or other inappropriate images. Mayor Stone expressed his concerns and
voted against Council Member Burt’s motion. Council Member Burt remarked he was not
aware of those valid concerns and could withdraw the motion or refer it to Policy and Services
to determine if acceptable boundaries could be established. Council Member Veenker pointed
out that Policy and Services discussed this topic and brought it to Council without a
recommendation. Council
Member
Veenker
was concerned
about the proliferation
of
Zoombombing including explicit sexual acts and you cannot unsee what was displayed on video
regardless how quickly you try to get it off screen. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims wanted to see a commenter’ s first and last name because she
was troubled by the anonymity. City Attorney Stump remarked that Council could have a policy
requiring first and last name but people had the right by law to be heard and did not have to
provide a name or their true name. Asking for first name and last initial was a result of the
Clerk’s discussion with her professional colleagues who noted people made up names reflecting
bias and hatred. 
Council Member Burt amended his motion to refer to the Policy and Services Committee to
make recommendations to the Council on procedures for remote video participation by the
public. Council Member Lythcott-Haims was okay with the amendment. Vice Mayor Lauing
supported the motion but noted it had been at the Policy and Services Committee. City
Attorney Stump stated if the commenter was speaking on topic while displaying offensive or
harmful material, the City was not able to remove that imagery while the person was speaking
unless it fit into a narrow definition of obscenity. Council Member Kou does not know what
Policy and Services could further discuss. She was concerned with displaying first and last name
on Zoom and subjecting staff to say an obscene or disgusting name. Council Member Kou
remembered a Zoom meeting when images were allowed and a person spoke on topic but had
an obscene drawing on the screen. Council Member Burt read the staff report but it did not
include most of the problems Council was discussing nor did it include the City Attorney’ s
clarification. Council Member Burt would not have made the same motion if he had that
additional information and was disappointed that Council was not receiving sound arguments
and legal clarifications at the outset. Council Member Burt withdrew his motion. 
MOTION: Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to:  
1. Update Procedures Section 5.1a(4): Video Participation for Public Comment to read: 
a. “ The City Council does not allow members of the public to activate their personal
video during their public comments.”  
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
Council Member Tanaka largely agreed with the comments made but believed any image
displayed on video could be shown in person as well. He opined most people were not going to
do the things Council Members discussed. He thought video allowed people to be more
authentic and it was more equitable. We communicate by looking at people’ s faces and Council
Member Tanaka supported the idea of allowing video because it improved communication with
the community. 
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains suggested skipping discussion on censure due to the time. 
Mayor Stone agreed to continue discussion until 10:30 p.m. and then move to the last item. 
Council decided upon language for Protocols Sections 2.2 and 2.8. 
MOTION: Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Veenker to:  
1. Protocols Section 2.2: Refrain from Lobbying Board and Commission Members
a. Accept the Policy and Services Recommended drafted language.  
2. Protocols Section 2.8: The Role of Council Liaison to Boards or Commissions
a. Accept the Policy and Services Recommended drafted language with this
additional language: “ unless the Councilmember has other conflicting duties” 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
Council Member Tanaka was not in support of spending taxpayer dollars on international travel. 
Council Member Burt was supportive of the Sister Cities and Sibling Cities programs and noted
that Council Members and the Mayor frequently choose to participate in events at Sister Cities
on their vacations at the Council Member’ s expense. Discussion ensued on language for
Protocols Section 4.3(a). 
MOTION: Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Mayor Stone to:  
1. Protocols Section 4.3(a): Travel Related to Sister Cities, Sibling City, or other shared
interests with another city abroad
a. Approve the drafted language with the following amendment:  
Replace “ for travel that explains how the travel will advance the City’s interests
or policy/ Council objectives and a consideration of the cost/ value relationship of
the trip. The request should also explain why virtual attendance is not effective
in that circumstance” with “would only be on an occasion where in-person
presence of the Council Member or the Mayor was required for that occasion.” 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no
14. 
Policy and Services Committee Recommendation to the City Council to Approve a new
Friendship Cities Program in Palo Alto. CEQA Status – Not a Project
Public Comment: 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
1. 
Sarah B. explained the Friendship Cities program. Neighbors Abroad devised a system
where their Board, upon the request of a City, recommended a simple agreement. She
requested to lift the restriction of two cities within three years. Neighbors Abroad wanted to
take the burden off staff and put requirements for visits upon themselves. 
2. 
Bing W., Board Member of Neighbors Abroad, believed the Sister City/ Friendship City
structure kept Palo Alto’s status as a global city and promoted democracy globally. 
3. 
Ed F. commented that Friendship Cities were a wonderful way to connect to a more
diverse population. He noted Palo Alto did not have a relationship with any country in Africa, 
which was a huge developing area ripe for a wonderful relationship.  
4. 
Bob W. asked to remove the numerical limit on Friendship Cities because Neighbors
Abroad was not creating excessive burden. He appreciated Council Members’ years of support
and innovation in international relations. 
Council Member Veenker was in support of the motion and did not want limits on the number
of Friendship Cities because signing a letter was not a burden on the City. 
Council Member Burt supported removing the two Friendship Cities per three years’ restriction. 
He believed both parties receive many benefits from these relationships, including economic
benefits. Palo Alto is a diverse community with people living here from all over the world. 
Having relationships from their home country or home continent was meaningful to many in
our community. Being diverse and inclusive helped Palo Alto fulfill its City objectives. This week, 
the Mayor of Heidelberg, although not on an official delegation visit, will tour the Accelerator
before coming to City Hall. Nordic House hosts Sweden, where we have a Sister City
relationship. Palo Alto has had economic delegations from China and Japan. Sister City
relationships reinforce Palo Alto as a significant city globally, economically and in the tech
community. Palo Alto has sustainability relationships with Oaxaca and European cities. 
Council Member Kou was in support of the Friendship Cities program. She grew up in the
Sudan, Guam and other countries. She thought it was valuable to know traditions and customs
of other countries as well as adjusting the conversation or negotiations based on nuances
learned in interacting with different countries. 
Discussion ensued on the wording of the motion. 
Council Member Kou asked staff about the fiscal resource impact and if it should go through the
City Clerk’s Office or the City Manager’ s Office. Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains replied that
staff could discuss that internally. We were in the second of two years of Council-approved
administrative support for Neighbors Abroad, which needed reconsideration at the upcoming
budget cycle. Last year, the budget allocated one-time funding of $20,000 to Neighbors Abroad
for hosting delegations, which Council needed to reconsider in the upcoming budget process. 
The idea was that Neighbors Abroad provided interaction and activities when delegations visit
Palo Alto but would not pay for all the expenses. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 15
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes: 02/ 05/2024
Council Member Kou asked for additional information on the consideration of a fellowship
program for interested staff members. City Manager Shikada explained that staff participation
in a fellowship program allowed the broader organization and community to benefit from
learning opportunities through these relationships. Staff could run this as an administrative
program and did not need Council approval if it fit within the existing budget. 
Council Member Tanaka heard staff previously talk about being short on staff resources and
projected a budget deficit for the next five years. He asked how much money this program
would cost annually in staff resources. Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains responded that staff
had not quantified the dollar amount. Council Member Tanaka loved what this program was
doing but it was a major challenge to justify it at a time when the City was losing money. 
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains stated the cost depended on the number of Friendship
Cities. Neighbors Abroad took the responsibility to do most of the legwork. Staff was hopeful it
did not require a lot of additional staff time but the amount of staff time was unknown. 
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Veenker to approve a
new Friendship Cities program with the provisions recommended in the original colleagues’ 
memo and a few other new provisions related to reevaluation of Friendship Cities as well as
Sister Cities and the following changes:  
a. Reevaluated within 3 years and that any Friendship Cities entered into shall expire
within 3 years of execution absent mutual agreement to extend. No more than one
formal visit by a delegation and the City shall host no more than one delegation visit per
year per Friendship City, and;  
b. That the provisions suggested in the Colleague' s Memo related to the volunteers of
Neighbors Abroad taking primary responsibility and that it fits with Neighbors Abroad
policies, and; 
c. Every two years a report to be provided by Neighbors Abroad on the state of Sister City
relationships. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
Adjournment: Mayor Stone adjourned tonight’s meeting in honor of Sam Anderson, a Palo
Altan who passed recently. Mr. Anderson’ s accomplishments included being the first Student
Body President of Cubberley, an English teacher for over 35 years locally and recognized as
Teacher of the Year. Meeting adjourned at 11:11 p.m. 
