CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 6 
Regular Meeting 
 
April 8, 2024 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual 
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Council Member Vicki Veenker virtual teleconference address: 3404 S. Ashwood Dr. 
Bloomington, IN 47401 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Tanaka 
Present Remotely:  
 
Stone, Veenker 
Absent: 
 
 
Lythcott-Haims 
 
Call to Order 
Mayor Stone called the meeting to order. The clerk called roll with six present.  
Council Member Veenker stated she was out of state in Bloomington, Indiana. She was in a 
publicly accessible place and the agenda was posted more than 72 hour before the meeting.  
Mayor Stone invoked the Just Cause provision of AB 2449. The justification was that he was in 
Tsuchiura, Japan on business of the City of Palo Alto. There were no adults in the room 18 or 
older.  
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None.  
 
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY-POTENTIAL LITIGATION 
Subject: Claims pursuant to Public Contract Code 9204 related to construction of the 
Public Safety Building from general contractor Swinerton Builders, and its 
subcontractors [including Pacific Structures, Inc.; CCI Construction, Inc.; Walters & Wolf, 
WSA, Helix Construction Company; Broadway Mechanical; Sandis; Northern Services, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 6 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/08/2024 
Inc.; Commercial Controls Corp; Blues Roofing; and Harrison Drywall]. Authority: 
Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(2) 
2. 
PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT 
Title: City Auditor 
Authority: Cal. Gov. Code 54957(b) 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to go into Closed 
Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-0-1, Lythcott-Haims absent 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:40 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 8:39 P.M. 
Vice Mayor Lauing announced no reportable action. 
 
Special Orders of the Day 
3. 
Interview Candidates for Vacancies on Boards and Commissions. CEQA Status – Not a 
project. 
NO ACTION TAKEN 
Council Member Burt asked Mr. Bhattacharya to share his thoughts about how planning and 
transportation relate and his views on it.  
Vice Mayor Lauing wanted to know why Planning and Transportation appealed to Mr. 
Bhattacharya.   
Council Member Kou wondered if Mr. Bhattacharya has seen anything that is lacking in the 
meetings when it comes to agenda items. She asked Mr. Hechtman when he is sitting at PTC 
representing the City if he spoke with the residents of the City.  
Council Member Burt asked Mr. Hechtman to share the degree to which his point of view as an 
attorney and an advocate for developers drives his recommendations.   
Council Member Tanaka questioned Mr. Hechtman who else on the Commission has his legal 
background.  
Vice Mayor Lauing asked Mr. Hechtman what kind of decisions he thought the PTC should be 
making.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 6 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/08/2024 
Council Member Burt discussed the limitations of the Stormwater Oversight Management 
Committee. He wanted Mr. Bennet’s thoughts about whether the Committee should have a 
broader purview.  
Vice Mayor Lauing wondered how much Mr. Bennet’s investment overlaps with things that are 
directly relative to this commission seat.  
Council Member Kou wanted to know Mr. Bennet’s beliefs on what the City could do better 
with stormwater management.   
Council Member Tanaka asked how Mr. Bennet would be able to spot or help throughout if 
there were issues going on with financing.  
Council Member Burt asked for Mr. Mayer’s thoughts on the question he asked Mr. Bennet. He 
described how the City has managed runoff water and asked Mr. Mayer’s observation of the 
role of an oversight committee and outside perspectives.   
Council Member Kou questioned Mr. Mayer if he thought it would be worth exploring 
expanding the purview for this commission and looking at ways to recharge the area.  
Vice Mayor Lauing wanted to know if Ms. Pajjuri had a perspective on why delays happen.  
Council Member Burt inquired about Ms. Pajjuri’s thoughts on expanding the purview from 
merely financial oversight to making policy and program recommendations.  
Council Member Kou asked how Ms. Pajjuri would apply her expertise gained in the corporate 
world to this commission.  
Council Member Tanaka queried if Ms. Pajjuri was ever in a role where she had to manage a 
budget. 
Council Member Kou inquired how Mr. Owes’ background experience could help with this 
commission.  
Council Member Burt was interested in Mr. Owes’ thoughts on the purview of the Oversight 
Committee and whether it should extend beyond the financial review into recommendations 
on policies and programs.  
Vice Mayor Lauing asked Mr. Owes’ what he felt like he had accomplished in the time he had 
been on the Commission.  
 
Planning and Transportation Commission: 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 6 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/08/2024 
1. Ashish Bhattacharya introduced himself and described some relevant personal 
experiences in his life. He discussed his goals and future plans. He discussed his views on 
why transportation was important because of safety concerns within the City and how 
transportation and planning are interrelated. He explained that he has friends on the 
Transportation committee and is aware of their agendas. He saw planning as one of the 
fundamental lynch pins of community development. It was his opinion they should 
make certain accommodations for the services workers coming into the City.  
2. Barton Hechtman discussed his experience on the PTC for the past four years. He 
explained as he approached a meeting, he did not typically reach out to anyone. He felt 
it was his duty to be open to anyone that wants to talk to him and then disclose. He 
thought in his original application and interview he made clear that he believes in 
property rights. He developed an affinity for developers because he was interested in 
the process of development. He described previous jobs he held relevant to this 
position. He admitted that he may forcefully advocate his initial position in meetings but 
he was about building consensus. He stated there was no one else on the Commission 
that comes from a similar land use background at that time. He said use permits was an 
example of decision that could be made by the planning commission but could be 
appealed to the Council and gave other examples.  
Stormwater Management Oversight Committee 
1. Gregory Bennet introduced himself to the Council and described his relevant 
employment experience and his experience in restoring a historical property in Palo 
Alto. He was aware of the light recommending work of the Committee. He would 
welcome the opportunity to weigh in on other issues. He described situations he 
thought the Committee could successfully work with other commissions on. He offered 
that he had a professional understanding of water management. His water 
infrastructure investments he has been a part of had not bearing on the Bay Area and 
he was currently not invested in any water companies. Regarding stormwater 
management, what works for one situation may not work in another due to differing 
variables. He advised learning from the learned and then determine the best course of 
action. He opined the low-hanging fruit is implementing the current plan that has been 
in place as it had been done with great care and works very well. He thought there may 
be adjustments, additions or addendums that may one day have to be brought for 
another ballot measure in the future. He believed they were in a unique position to set 
an example for other Bay Area cities. He thought a lot of the delta he had seen in the 
plan versus actuals had to do with bid prices increasing since the original 2017 budget 
and making sure those were inline with inflations and other things would be number 
one and interpreting the budget versus actuals on some of the commodity and price 
fluctuations that happened over the pandemic were inline.  
2. Kevin Mayer introduced himself and his experiences that were relevant to the position. 
As he was retired, he felt he could volunteer for a more structured commitment. He 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 6 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/08/2024 
thought the City’s plan expressed how to move water away from where it is unwanted 
reasonably well and putting it into practice involves the oversight. Managing the 
prevention of water from becoming a problem was a lot more challenging. He did not 
think a commission would be able to do much about increased precipitation and it 
would be challenging to get a community as a whole to implement activities that would 
let the water absorb into the soil instead of running off into to streets, gutters and 
pipes. He believed the actions the City has taken makes a lot of sense and should be 
encouraged. He thought some of those activities were at a scale that did not balance 
with the whole City’s issues about managing stormwater. He was interested in seeing 
what percentage of precipitation could be managed through some of the projects that 
are at a less than city-wide scale. He thought it would be worth exploring expanding the 
purview of the committee and looking for ways to recharge the area. He discussed his 
understanding of recharging.  
3. Ambika Pajjuri introduced herself and provided a background. She discussed her 
employment history and her experience relevant to this position. She explained her 
perspective on the delays. She was not well-versed enough to answer the policies aspect 
but thought that the Commission should look at other avenues on what innovations 
could be done and she would be excited to work on those aspects. She would not be 
familiar with how that translates to funding any new programs. She described ways she 
would apply her corporate experience to this position. She described her purview as the 
product management leader.  
4. Ron Owes introduced himself and provided his background experience relevant to the 
position. He explained why he can understand the projects that are being financed. He 
described his thoughts on some of the ways the role of the committee could be 
expanded. In his time on the Commission, he described how he had begun to 
understand its role and to appreciate the City staff.   
Public Comment 
 
1. 
Noel S. defined the word terror. He asked Council to think about Gaza as being in a 
constant state of terror with the full support of our tax dollars.   
2. 
Yazan A. discussed President Biden using the word ceasefire because of seeing Israel kill 
seven foreign aid workers. He asked Council how they live with their silence after what 
they have seen, how much more it will take and why his life is worth less than the rest 
of the room.   
3. 
Lori speaking on behalf of (7): Mika I., Tania B., Eric T., Rebecca S., Rick F., and Elinor T. 
shared some incidences of recent antisemitic and offensive behavior in Palo Alto. She 
described how this type of behavior was becoming normalized at City Council meetings 
and pro-ceasefire protests. She urged Council to enforce rules and ensure accountability 
by those who hold permits for events, urge police to follow up with the permit holder to 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 6 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  04/08/2024 
identify the protestors dressed as security guards and ensure their conduct was 
compliant with California regulations, ensure that events involving the problematic 
groups that sponsor and promote events are given extra scrutiny to guarantee they 
follow all rules, procedures and norms, make sure the police are in attendance at all 
such events to ensure safety and security for all and take action to try to bring the City 
together in healing.  
4. 
Ella speaking on behalf of (7): Giora, Adele, Allyson R., Rotem, Estee, and Avner 
expressed disbelief of how the City turned on her and her family on October 7. She 
described antisemitism she and her family had experienced recently in Palo Alto. She 
stressed that students must be educated about the history and consequences of 
antisemitism.  
5. 
Dr. D communicated a need to face the truth in the complicity of the US in the genocide 
that is occurring and expressed the need for a ceasefire statement for legal and moral 
absolution in order to heal as a community.  
 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
None.  
 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:02 P.M. 
 
 
