CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 14
Special Meeting
January 16, 2024
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka
Present Remotely:   
Veenker
Absent:  
Call to Order
Mayor Stone called the meeting to order. 
Interim City Clerk Mahealani Ah Yun called roll and declared all were present.  
Council Member Veenker invoked the just cause provision of AB 2449 because she was
attending the Northern California Power Association meeting in Sacramento, having been
recently appointed as Palo Alto's commissioner. She declared there were no adults 18 or older
in the room with her.   
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
Mayor Stone voiced there were none. 
Public Comment
Sarah B. thanked Council for the work they were doing to keep the community united and for
not considering a ceasefire resolution. She read a paragraph from a letter the Legislative Jewish
Caucus had sent to the entire legislature last week, which related to the resolutions.  
Jessica K. announced that she would attend Council meetings until a ceasefire resolution was
put on the agenda and passed. She spoke of a proclamation Council adopted on October 21, 
2023, condemning the October 7 attack by Hamas, which she found to be biased. She
requested Council address the issue.  
Andrea G., speaking as a member of 350 Palo Alto, congratulated Mayor Stone and thanked
him for focusing on youth mental health. She spoke of climate anxiety and read from an article
published in the Nature journal last year. She thanked Council for their work related to climate
change and requested Palo Alto stop the use of natural gas by 2030. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
Deborahlise
M. recognized
the territory of the Ramaytush
Ohlone. She spoke of the
environment and asked Council to consider a ceasefire. 
Michelle H. read a poem by Mosab Abu Toha, a Palestinian poet. She requested a ceasefire
resolution be urgently agendized.  
Lori M. congratulated Mayor Stone and Vice Mayor Lauing and thanked former Chair Kaloma
Smith and the HRC for the listening session last week. She looked forward to working and
partnering with HRC and Council to combat antisemitism. 
Matt S. ( Zoom) noted that he was speaking from Ohlone land. He discussed the water heater
replacement program and requested the replacement rate be increased. He suggested there be
a ceasefire in relation to the climate crisis.  
Aram J. ( Zoom) read from the article Israel Palestine and Me by Council Member Lythcott-
Haims. He was in favor of a ceasefire resolution and asked that it be put on the agenda. He
wanted to know Council's views on the issue. He claimed a discussion on the topic was a First
Amendment right.  
Sarah Woodham (Zoom) asked for Council to pass a resolution calling for a ceasefire in the war, 
which she believed could be accelerated to federal representatives to determine how to
proceed in relation to human rights. She wanted residents' voices to be elevated.  
Avroh S. ( Zoom), a representative of PASCC, agreed with Ms. Andrea G's comments related to
climate anxiety. He spoke of his climate anxiety. He implied that climate action was not
prioritized to the same degree as mental health. He requested that climate action be the
number-one priority in 2024.  
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements
Council Member Lythcott-Haims commended Youth Community Service for the MLK Day
activities.  
Consent Calendar
1. 
Approval of Minutes from December 11, 2023, December 18, 2023, and December 19, 
2023 Meetings
2. 
Adopt an Ordinance to Expand the Public Art Commission ( PAC) from Five to Seven
Members; CEQA status - not a project
3. 
Approval of Contract Amendment Number 1 to Contract Number C24189060 with US
Bank and its Wholly owned Subsidiary Elavon for General Banking and Merchant
Services and Approval of Contract Amendment Number C24189061 with Wells Fargo for
Lockbox Services; CEQA Status – Not a Project. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
4. 
Approval of Professional Services Contract with Energy and Environmental Economics, 
Inc. ( E3) for a Not-to-Exceed Amount of $945,286 for the Sustainability and Climate
Action Plan ( S/ CAP) Funding Study; Amendment to Professional Services Contract with
Sterling Communications, Inc. to Amend the Scope, Extend the Timeline, and Increase
Total Not-to-Exceed Compensation by $ 75,000 ( from $ 85,000 to $ 160,000); and a
Budget Amendment in the Electric Fund for Acceptance of $75,000 DEED grant for
S/ CAP Funding Study; CEQA Status – Not a Project. 
5. 
Accept the City of Palo Alto’s Audited Financial Statements as of June 30, 2023 and the
Macias, Gini & 
O’Connell
Management
Letter; Approve
the
FY
2023
Annual
Comprehensive Financial Report ( ACFR)and Amendments to the FY 2023 Budget in
Various Funds; and Adopt a Resolution to Extend and Amend the Development Services
Reserve Fund Policy, as Recommended by the Finance Committee; CEQA Status – Not a
Project
6. 
Approval of Amendment No. 2 with Pets in Need Contract ( C19174493) to extend the
term through March 2024 and increase the compensation by $342,501 for operations of
the Palo Alto Animal Shelter, for a Not-to-Exceed Amount of $4,431,872; CEQA status – 
not a project. 
7. 
Adopt a Resolution Approving an Amendment to the City’s 2009 California-Oregon
Transmission Project Long-Term Layoff Agreement to Extend the City’s Layoff of its
Share of the California Oregon Transmission Project ( COTP) until 2034 and to Receive
Annual Market Payments as Recommended by the Utilities Advisory Commission ( UAC); 
CEQA Status – Not a Project
8. 
Approval of Recommendations on Process for 2024 Council Priority Setting Retreat as
Recommended by Policy & Services Committee (CEQA Status – Not a Project) 
9. 
Approval of the Office of the City Auditor' s Investment Management Audit Report as
Recommended by the Policy & Services Committee (CEQA Status - Not a Project) 
10. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of an Ordinance Amending Palo Alto Municipal Code
PAMC) Section 18.42.160 ( Safe Parking) to Permanently Establish the Congregation-
Based Safe Parking Program and Establishing Regulations Related to Safe Parking, 
Including a Maximum Number of Vehicles Per Night on Each Site ( FIRST READING: 
December 4, 2023 PASSED 6-1, Tanaka no) 
11. 
SECOND
READING: Adoption of an Ordinance
Amending Chapters 4.10 ( Licenses
Obtained by Application to Chief of Police), 4.30 ( Soliciting Funds), and Chapter 4.32
Soliciting Information for Commercial Purposes); and Adding Chapter 4.12 to Title 4
Business Licenses and Regulations) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code to Comply With
Updates to the Law, Including 2018 Senate Bill 946 (Sidewalk Vendors). CEQA status – 
categorically exempt. ( FIRST READING: December 11, 2023 PASSED 5-1-1, Kou no, 
Veenker absent) 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
12. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of an Urgency Ordinance and an Interim Ordinance That
Allows the Director
of Planning
and Development
Services to Extend
Planning
Entitlements for Housing Development
Projects up to an Additional 18 Months. 
Environmental
Review: Exempt from CEQA in Accordance with CEQA Guidelines
15061(b)(3). ( FIRST READING: December 11, 2023 PASSED 5-1-1, Kou no, Veenker
absent) 
Public Comment
Interim City Clerk Mahealani Ah Yun announced no hands were raised and there were no
requests to speak.  
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Mayor Stone to approve Agenda Item
Numbers 1-12. 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 11, 12. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 4, 6, 10. 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 1-3, 5, 7-9:  7-0
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 4, 6, 10: 6-1, Tanaka no
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 11-12:  6-1, Kou no
Council Member Kou commented, regarding Item 11, there should be a public discussion
related to incorporating more sidewalk and other public spaces uses. Concerning Item 12, she
voiced that extension of project entitlements should be done case by case versus applying it to
all projects.  
Council Member Tanaka did not support doubling the marketing budget or bundling 3 contracts
with regard to Item 4. As for Items 6 and 10, he noted that he had voted no in the past.  
City Manager Comments
City Manager Ed Shikada stated there would be opportunities for community input on items the
City was working on. There would be a community meeting with respect to a recreation
wellness center on January 17. There would be a San Antonio Road Corridor Vision Workshop
on January 24. Council' s annual retreat was to be held on January 29, and community members
could participate at the meeting and provide input in advance. On January 31, there would be a
community workshop on the Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation Plan, which would be
virtual only, and there were a variety of formats for community input, and additional events
would be forthcoming. He discussed the Advanced Heat Pump Water Heater Program
advancing. He suggested folks sign up for the program. He spoke of State financial incentives.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked if one had an emergency need to repair a water heater if
they could be retroactively added to the program for reimbursement. 
City Manager Shikada suggested residents call and work with staff to determine options. They
were working on an emergency replacement program, but it was not in place yet. They hoped
to have additional information very soon. He expressed there were a number of resources
available to the community related to the winter season and potential upcoming storms. 
Ongoing
information
and
resources
could
be found at cityofpaloalto. org/ stormupdate. 
Upcoming agendas included the approval of the City Clerk appointment, Easement Relocation
Agreement at Castilleja School, 2025-2023 long-range financial forecast, and the annual
legislative guidelines review and legislative program on January 22, and the 2025 annual
Council Retreat would be on January 29. February would include the mid-year budget review, 
follow-up discussion on the Council Procedures & Protocols Handbook, and updated ordinance
language related to SB9 projects.  
Vice Mayor Lauing discussed a positive personal experience related to his new heat pump
water heater.  
Action Items
13. 
Tree Protection Ordinance Year One Review and Recommendations; Adoption of an
Ordinance Amending Chapter 8.04 (Street Trees, Shrubs, and Plants) and Chapter 8.10
Tree Preservation and Management Regulations of the Palo Alto Municipal Code to
Update the Allowable Reasons for Removal of Protected Trees, Make Clarifying Changes, 
and to
Make
Clerical
Updates; and
Adoption
of
a
Resolution
amending
the
Administrative Penalty Schedule to Increase the Penalties for Violations of Title 8 of the
Palo Alto Municipal Code; CEQA Status – Not a Projects
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston remarked that they had evaluated the first year of
implementation of the 2022 Tree Protection Ordinance. They had identified issues, which had
been reviewed with the PTC and the PRC, which resulted in the ordinance changes they were
recommending for adoption.  
Urban Forester Peter Gollinger provided a presentation focusing on some of the proposed
updates. He outlined key components of the 2022 ordinance. During the passage of that
update, Council directed staff to evaluate modifications to the ordinance and the PTC and PRC
to review planning implications. The proposed updates had been crafted in relation to a study
session with Council and reviews with the PRC and PTC. The updates had recently been
presented at the Palo Alto Neighborhoods regular meeting. In the spring, they would explore
with the PDS possible tree ordinance exemptions for certain housing projects, which would be
taken to PTC for discussion. The key proposed changes included trees as a public nuisance, 
clarifications to sections of the 2022 updated code, clarifications added for existing practices, 
formal exemption for tree disclosure requirements on state ADU projects, revisions to the
appeals process for protected tree removal, and updates to allowable reasons for removal. He
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
provided slides and detailed the proposed changes related to the above. Regarding the
proposed update for tree removal, he explained the difference between retrenchment and
right tree, right place. He discussed what proposed updates for tree removal as part of a
development on a residential lot included. He supplied a slide with the proposed language for
tree removal as part of commercial developments. They were requesting an update to the
administrative penalty list, which could be used when writing citations. It had not been updated
in many years, and many code sections were not included in the current version. He displayed a
slide of potential additional actions that had been discussed with PRC and PTC, though none of
the proposals were popular with either commission, so they were not further explored. They
had discussed potential actions related to housing, and they would continue to work on it with
Planning and Development staff and present any proposals to PTC in the spring. He mentioned
that the change to 8.10.070 was included in the staff report, and they had intended to add it to
Attachment A in the red line, but it had been omitted. They requested the motion include that
change. It was a clarification on requests to exceed the limits for excessive pruning regarding
trees maintained as a hedge, pollarded trees, or other practices that might require greater
pruning on an annual basis. Permission could be sought, which would be good for five years. 
Public Comment
JP R. noted that he was in his fifth month of being Executive Director of Canopy. They
supported the recommendations but thought it would be premature and counterproductive to
consider additional changes with the ordinance being in its infancy. He claimed work needed to
be done to understand the health of drought-affected trees and where to prioritize ongoing
care and tree work. They believed resident input and acceptance was essential to a successful
urban forest and that the City should continue to track the impact on residents and apply
discretion should lives and property be at stake.  
Simon P. spoke of the environmental and financial benefits trees brought to the City. He
opposed removing trees to build massive houses. He hoped diseased or unstable trees being
removed would be replaced. He asked that the tree canopy be protected.  
Leah R. stated that a tree fell on her house during a storm after she had been told the tree was
healthy and could not be removed. She did not support this ordinance. She indicated that
flexibility, adaptation, and mitigation were needed and that there should be incentives to plant
and maintain trees. She encouraged Council to review the letter she sent earlier in the day, 
which included policy suggestions. She explained why she thought right tree, right place was
too vague.  
John K. associated himself with Ms. Leah R's comments. He asked that the item be removed
from the agenda and postponed to a future meeting and that staff do additional work, which he
discussed. He had sent a letter concerning a tree falling in Rinconada Park. He requested
homeowners be given the ability to manage risks sensibly.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
Winter D. felt there was ignorance or misunderstanding
about the new ordinance and
proposals. She provided some facts related to tree cover and tree loss. She indicated that more
trees needed to be planted and that existing trees needed to be protected. She asked that the
staff recommendation and proposals be approved, that more reductions in tree protection be
avoided, and that the resolution amending the administrative penalty schedule to increase
penalties for violation be adopted.  
Jeff
G. spoke
as the
PRC
Chair. The
commission
unanimously
supported
the
staff
recommendation and to not pursue any of the other potential changes outlined by staff. The
commission recognized that the other potential changes were not in the staff recommendation
because staff did not recommend those changes at this time. Speaking personally, he noted
that the challenge was to strike a balance between preserving and growing the urban canopy
and the environmental health and S/ CAP benefits of the trees versus property owner, resident, 
and developer flexibility and discretion. He stated that he had learned that the canopy was
shrinking, and he indicated actions needed to be taken to preserve it. He strongly supported
the updates to the administrative penalty schedule. He urged Council to support staff's
recommendation.  
Karen H. congratulated Mayor Stone and Vice Mayor Lauing. She commented that staff's
recommendations were reasonable refinements, which she supported. She discussed losing
birds and birds losing their habitats. She voiced that new housing needed to include trees.  
Council Member Burt asked if these changes could have resulted in a different outcome in Leah
R's case. It seemed there was not a lot of guidance constituting right tree and wrong tree.  
Urban Forrester Gollinger answered that in Leah R's situation, it was possible that the tree
would have been the wrong tree for that place. Without having inspected it, he could not say
for sure. The right-tree-in-the-right-place principles were intended to match a tree to a location
and allow flexibility.  
Council Member Burt stated that it did not seem as though there was a lot of guidance
constituting right tree and wrong tree. He asked how it might have been judged to be a wrong
tree in that place. He thought all needed to recognize there was no way to remove all risks from
an environment with many mature trees. He asked if any of these changes would have affected
the tree falling in Rinconada. He struggled to understand what would be permissible pruning. 
He inquired how the risk of root rot might be addressed. 
Urban Forrester Gollinger did not think right tree, right place could be used in terms of
unexpected health issues of a tree but was more a tree being compatible with a space. In
applying for a removal, an arborist report would be submitted with an application, and the
arborist would present a case indicating why a tree would be the wrong tree in the wrong
place, and staff would approve it if appropriate. There was a short list of principles in the staff
report. They planned to include a full list in the Tree and Landscape Technical Manual, and they
planned to take it to the City Manager for approval upon the ordinance going into effect. From
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
the ground, there was no obvious problem with the tree in Rinconada. Once the tree fell, a flaw
had been discovered. He did not think it could have been anticipated unless someone had been
up in the tree. He did not think this ordinance would have had any relevance to it. Root rot was
difficult to ascertain without doing a full root crown excavation, and he did not know if it was
practical to do on a large scale basis unless there was a suspicion. It had been done on selected
trees.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims was concerned that the staff report had expressed that the
storms last year were unusual. For example, the Finance Committee had discussed a storm like
last year being the new normal and that it should be planned for accordingly. She cautioned all
about one person giving opposing views related to climate change. She was concerned about
homeowner property rights, and she wanted people to be able to rely on regulations so they
could predict what they could do with their lot and home. She found the rules and regulations
detailed and confusing, and she worried about compliance and the ability to abide by the rules. 
She was in favor of simpler language and regulations. She appreciated Ms. Leah R's statement
about command and control not being as useful as incentives. She was concerned about
housing production, and she asked about the feasibility of a program allowing homeowners to
remove unwanted mature trees to build an ADU, for example, and being required to replace a
removed tree with two trees on their property or pay into a fund that the City or Canopy would
manage that would allow planting of trees on public lands and lower income residents applying
for funds for tree planting or maintenance on their lots. She stated that there was going to be
further conversation on housing exemption changes to Title 8, which would go to the PTC in the
spring. In regard to Mr. John K's suggestion to table this item, she asked what would be
presented to the PTC in the spring and if there was merit to consolidating the items.  
Urban Forrester Gollinger responded that they included the carveout for State pathway ADUs
that would meet State guidelines. They could not prevent those. If a tree was in the way, it
would be a straight yes or no. For larger projects, there was the ability to work around selected
tree removals if there was no other option. If an ADU could only be placed where a tree existed, 
they could apply for tree removal and replace it accordingly. He explained that it did not fit all
situations. It was something they were discussing, and if additional changes were needed, it
would happen with Planning and Development Services. Concerning tabling the item, when this
ordinance was adopted in 2022 and when they heard the concerns from residents and property
owners that it could be going too far, Council asked that issues be tracked and discussed with
the boards and commissions and brought back to Council. When the issue of the exemptions
for housing came up, they considered delaying, but what staff was now presenting added
considerable flexibility to what was passed by Council in 2022. They did not want to hold up
addressing the issues they had already identified and giving more flexibility to residents and
projects than what currently existed while the other work was done.  
Director Eggleston added that about 90% of the applications and building permits for ADUs that
had been received over the past 3 years fell within 800 square feet or less, which was exempt
from the Tree Ordinance per the State requirements.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
City Manager Ed Shikada noted that what Director Eggleston described was consistent with the
feedback received from HCD. There was a request to analyze the potential constraint on ADUs
and other housing types, so the analysis was ongoing for the other housing types. He said the
Council had received the changes noted last year as well as the current proposal.  
Vice Mayor Lauing commented that there had not been enough cases in a year to be
completely exhaustive of all being considered. He did not think this should be stopped to do
more work, but if it was approved, work should continue. He thought this needed to be
approached by way of objective standards with some sort of provision. He queried what
impacting" meant related to 8.10.050 and if much of a tree had to be pruned for powerline
clearance. He spoke of science not being perfect in determining tree health. He thought maybe
there was a way to plan for homeowners wanting to replace unwanted trees. He voiced that
there would be storms and trees would fall, which could not be predicted, so there was
uncertainty which had to be accepted, and he was not sure how that could be legislated.  
Urban Forrester Gollinger explained the use of the term "impacting." The word "sidewalk" was
intentionally left out. If there was damage to a sidewalk, it would be fixed. Pruning would be
done for powerline clearance. They continued to encourage homeowners to plant appropriate
trees under powerlines or they would help them with a removal and replacement program.  
Council Member Veenker considered trees to be a benefit. She cared about residents' safety
and enjoying their yards. She expressed that everything needed to be balanced. It seemed that
the ideal would be to incentivize people wanting trees. She thought there should be flexibility
to replace trees of concern, which included those that people were worried about falling and
those that were unwanted. She provided an example of several trees of a certain kind falling on
one side of a street and there being one of the same kind still standing on the other side of the
same street. She understood that would not fall under the right tree in the right place principle, 
so she
asked for information on the right tree in the right place conditions and if it would
include use. Since three of the same type of trees fell on that street, she wondered if there was
flexibility for the one standing and if it implicated the right tree in the right place even if it was
not at the retrenchment stage. She inquired if trees producing sap would qualify as a public
nuisance and, if not, if it could be classified as the wrong tree in the wrong place.  
Urban Forrester Gollinger replied, in relation to that example, he believed they were street
trees, so if staff determined that the trees were hazardous or showed sign of an issue, they
would put it on the removal and replacement list. They planned to continue to do that in
neighborhoods with aging trees. Part of the reason they included the retrenchment in reasons
for removal was to account for trees on private property that may have reached the end of
their useful lifespan but not technically considered hazardous. Regarding the standing tree in
the example, he thought it was likely that it was an end of useful lifespan for those particular
trees on that street, but it could be applied to the right tree in the right place. Regarding trees
producing sap, the updates to the infestation were intended to capture infestations that were
threatening the entire urban forest, which he provided examples of. As far as infestations not
injurious to trees but impacting the use of one's property, the right tree in the right place
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
principles might come into effect. An arborist' s report would make a case for a tree being the
wrong tree in the wrong place, and staff would address it on a case-by-case basis. Impact on
use of a property could be a factor in the right tree in the right place principles and, not in all
instances, but in certain situations, it could be applied.  
Council Member Kou questioned, concerning Number 2 of Packet Page 367, if trees could only
be removed under State law if a court ruled on a situation. Concerning sustainability and
addressing climate change, she found it interesting that the urban canopy trees, which was the
least expensive and did not have a GHG footprint, was one of the first things to be discussed for
removal as soon as it was found to be inconvenient and that building could be done in a space. 
She discussed why she found it unfortunate that housing versus trees was characterized in
writings. She addressed storms and earthquakes bringing down trees versus electric vehicle
fires, and rhetorically asked if EVs should be done away with. She requested that reality be
considered. She was concerned with the exemptions for ADUs. She hoped designs to preserve
trees would be encouraged. She appreciated that members of the public had produced facts
and not misinformation.  
Urban Forrester Gollinger answered that Number 2 on Packet Page 367 was one portion of the
public nuisance list. If a tree was not considered a nuisance under Palo Alto's code items, a
court could deem it a nuisance, and staff would agree that it had been deemed as such.  
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Lauing to: 
a. Adopt the proposed changes to Palo Alto Municipal Code amending Chapter 8.04 and
Chapter 8.10 of the Palo Alto Municipal Code and adopt a resolution amending the
Administrative Penalty Schedule to increase the penalties for violations of Title 8 of the
Palo Alto Municipal Code; and
b. Adopt the changes proposed to Section 8.10.070 as addressed in the staff report; and
c. Direct staff to engage with the community and through the Planning & Transportation
Commission for suggestions and proposals to educate and incentivize residents to
maintain and increase our canopy including ways compatible with development. 
Vice Mayor Lauing stated this was a work in progress and would not be the last time it would be
voted on. There needed to be flexibility for housing and trees.  
Mayor Stone addressed the discretionary removal of protected trees for large projects and a
net tree canopy increase on the property within 15 years and asked if that meant new trees
needed to be replanted within 15 years or if the lost canopy needed to be replenished within
15 years and how it was tracked and enforced; regarding the 25% rule for new single-family
homes who would bear the burden of proving there was no financially feasible design
alternatives that would prevent preservation of a tree; and how or if the 25% rule would apply
to ADUs and JADUs if the new unit was larger than 800 square feet. He agreed that significant
storm events would become more common with climate change. He discussed the storm
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
events last winter. He felt it was premature to contemplate additional changes at this time
since the City was only a year into this. He addressed flooding and higher temperatures and
trees being a critical tool in fighting that and helping to reach the 80 x 30 goal. He was glad to
see this would go back to PTC and PRC to discuss ways this could be improved. He supported
the motion.  
Urban Forrester Gollinger responded that the net tree canopy increase related to canopy itself. 
It was an existing policy that had been enforced for many years for a no net loss of canopy
included in the Urban Forest Master Plan and the Sustainability Plan. As for tracking and
enforcement, during the design phase there was a calculation to estimate what the tree canopy
would be in 15 years. Once planted, the trees were protected. They did not double check those, 
but they now had the capability to do it with a new canopy module tool, and they received
updates every two years. There was nothing in place yet to physically track those, but it could
be implemented in the future. Concerning the 25% rule for new single-family homes, typically
the applicant and the builder would bear the burden of proving there was no financially feasible
design alternatives that would prevent preservation of a tree. Staff would have a site meeting
with a City arborist, the project arborist, and the project designer or manager, and options
would be discussed. Generally there had been reasons that other options were not feasible, so
they had not had to use the calculation, but he detailed what would be done if the calculation
was used. The 25% rule would apply to the buildable area of the lot.  
Council Member Tanaka was concerned that the proposed motion did not address preventing
falling trees. He thought the first duty of a city was to ensure all felt safe. He would probably
not support the motion.  
Council Member Burt noted there had not been discussion related to drought and there being
concern in previous years of trees becoming weak and dying. He indicated that a lot of water-
intensive trees had been planted, so he was glad to see an emphasis of the right tree in the
right place principles on Page 7. He thought greater education about Palo Alto's natural habitat
would be helpful. He inquired if there was anything in the ordinance to address the open space
property owner needs in removing dead of dying trees. 
Urban Forrester Gollinger answered that he thought anything fire hazard related was covered
in the Fire Code. He believed they were required to have defensible space, which could
preclude this. He thought it was referenced in the 2022 updates that any time this was in
conflict with fire requirements, Fire would take precedence.   
Council Member Burt requested that be a subcategory on returning to Council. He discussed
the importance of preventing catastrophic wildfires.  
Urban Forrester Gollinger noted that the eucalyptuses were fire hazards, and they were exempt
and could be removed at any time.  
Council Member Veenker was interested in hearing proposals to educate residents about the
ecosystem and canopy maintenance and to incentivize residents to maintain and increase the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
canopy, including ways that would be compatible with development. She queried if the maker
and seconder of the motion had interest in adding a request for such.  
Director Eggleston voiced that the education part was in line with efforts that were underway. 
He was not clear what the reference to incentivize pertained to.  
Council Member Veenker thought it would take study on staff's part as to what might
incentivize residents to not want to cut down trees, if there were things that could be done to
encourage extra planting and maintaining and increasing the canopy.  
Council Member Kou did not see a reason not to do add it, and she thought it would go to PTC
and PRC for exploration as well.  
City Manager Ed Shikada suggested it be an invitation for the community to suggest what might
create incentive versus a research assignment for staff, and staff could compile it and bring it
back to Council.  
Vice Mayor Lauing related incentives to money, and he did not know where that could be
budgeted. He felt property owners were responsible for the parkways, not just their property, 
and that residents needed knowledge of that. He accepted the addition to the motion. 
City Manager Shikada anticipated that the follow-up work would go to the PTC only, and the
PRC was not expected to be involved in the next round of follow-up.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims stated that Housing and Canopy were both valued, and she did
not want one to harm the other. She was inclined not to support the motion because of the
issues raised by Ms. Leah R. She worried that the ordinance would bind property owners in a
controlling way and that it would transfer risk to them. She was in favor of allowing tree
replacement on a 2:1 or 3:1 basis or other mechanisms to ensure the canopy was not just
preserved but built out while allowing property owners to do what they needed to do. She was
concerned that neither the City nor the arborist would have responsibility for a fallen tree if a
homeowner sensed there was a problem with a tree and they were denied its removal. She was
uncomfortable in transferring significant risk to homeowners.  
MOTION PASSED:  5-2, Tanaka, Lythcott-Haims no
Council Member Kou thanked staff, PTC, and PRC for all the work in updating the ordinance as
well as looking at the refinements. She also thanked Urban Forester Gollinger and Mr. 
Hernandez. She had read some of the emails from residents. She appreciated their work and
apologized for the abuse they had been taking.  
Council took a 10-minute break] 
14. 
Approval
of
a
Substation
Improvement
Agreement
with
Tesla
Inc. to
Install
Improvements and Reserve Capacity at Hanover Substation, and Approval of a Fiscal
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
Year 2024 Budget Amendment in the Electric Fund to Establish the Hanover Substation
Upgrade Project ( EL-24001); CEQA Status – Exempt under CEQA Guideline Sections
15301 and 15302
Utilities Director Dean Batchelor remarked that Tesla was moving its engineering headquarters
to the former HP headquarters and were performing advanced research and development to
support their vehicles and products. The City was proposing to rebuild the existing Hanover
Substation, which was nearing the end of its lifeful use, to accommodate the need for power
increases, and to improve the design installed by Tesla. He stated the best way to meet these
needs was to work with Tesla. They were partnering with a public-private partnership that was
beginning to propose and would be implemented through the Substation Improvement
Agreement ( SIA), including an encroachment permit. Staff determined that the transformers
needing replacement were coming to the end of their life. He explained that the project would
have moved forward at a later date due to grid modernization. They were looking turn up the
project by April 2024. He provided details of the agreement being a benefit to the City with no
risks.  
Tesla Director, Infrastructure Policy & Business Development, Patrick Bean commented that
they had been working closely with Palo Alto's Utility staff and City attorneys to figure out a
mutually beneficial way to increase grid capacity. He noted that Tesla developed tests and
validated many new products in Palo Alto. They had over $150M in planned investments and
equipment for their engineering headquarters in Palo Alto, and upgrading the substation would
help them accelerate the investment and new product development. The substation was
nearing the end of its useful life, and the area needed new capacity. He explained that Tesla
could bring the project in at a lower cost to the City that would have otherwise occurred. The
additional capacity would be available for other customers, which they believed would help
drive further investment in Palo Alto.  
Electric Energy Manager Mohammad Fattah provided slides and spoke to the location of the
Tesla facility and the work Tesla was planning. He provided details of the work to be done at
the Hanover Substation and a high-level timeline. Tesla anticipated breaking ground on January
29 and the anticipated turn up date was September 17. He presented a slide related to project
funding, which he outlined. The City and Tesla had entered into an Improvement Agreement, 
and the parties would jointly design, construct, install, and fund the improvements at the
substation. He summarized the contract documents that had been negotiated. Staff requested
Council' s
approval
of the
Substation
Improvement
Agreement, with
Tesla
to
install
improvements and reserve capacity at the Hanover Substation, and approve a FY2024 budget
amendment in the Electric Fund to allocate $15M to the substation upgrade project.  
Council Member Veenker recused herself on Item 14. 
Council Member Veenker recused herself because the project was located on Stanford lands, and
she represented Stanford in patent matters.  
Public Comment
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 14
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  01/ 16/2024
Sunita D.T. explained that she did not have any concerns because once the project was
completed CPAU would operate as usual and there would be no more involvement with Tesla.  
Council Member Kou indicated that it sounded like a good deal. She asked if the lease at
Stanford Research Park (SRP) was long term and if sites at SRP other than Tesla would receive
power from the substation.  
City Manager Ed Shikada remarked that the City's use of the property with Stanford University
was an ongoing conversation, and hopefully it would be brought back to Council in the near
future.  
Director Batchelor replied that all business park customers in the area would receive power
from the substation.  
Council Member Kou noted that this was a great benefit to SRP, so she thought Stanford should
participate in the discussion so it could move forward. She wanted there to be a conclusion on
the lease because this may not be beneficial for the City or the SRP tenants. Not having a
conclusion to the lease discussions with SRP was her only hesitation in moving forward.  
Council Member Tanaka felt this was a good deal.  
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to: 
1. Approve and authorize the City Manager or their designee to execute the Substation
Improvement Agreement ( SIA) and attached Capacity Reservation Agreement between
the City of Palo Alto and Tesla for the design and construction of a substation
improvements at the City of Palo Alto’s Hanover Substation (Attachment A). 
2. Amend the Fiscal Year 2024 Budget Appropriation for the Electric Fund (requires a 2/3
vote) by: 
a. Establish the Hanover Substation Upgrade Project ( EL-24001) in the amount of
15,000,000; and
b. Decrease the Electric Fund Operations Reserve by $15,000,000. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims appreciated that $5M or $6M would be saved by doing the
public-private partnership.  
MOTION PASSED:  6-1, Veenker recused
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 8:16 P.M.  
