CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 10
Special Meeting
March 25, 2024
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker
Present Remotely:  
Absent:  
Call to Order
Mayor Stone called the meeting to order. The clerk called roll with five being present.  
Closed Session
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY- EXISTING LITIGATION
Subject: Reinert v. City of Palo Alto Santa Clara County Superior Court Case No. 21-CV-
391286 (One Case, as Defendant) 
Authority: Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(1) 
Public Commet: 
1. Liz G. (Zoom) hoped to have more public transparency and discussion in the future.  
MOTION:  Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Lauing to go into Closed
Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
Council went into Closed Session at 5:33 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 5:53 P.M. 
Mayor Stone announced no reportable action. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
None.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 10
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 25/2024
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements
Council Member Veenker congratulated Julia Zeitlin and her high school colleagues on the
launch of the Green Team Coalition.  
Action Items
2. 
Approval of the 2024 City Council Priority Objectives and Finance Committee and Policy
Services Committee Workplans (Item Continued from March 4, 2024, March 11, 2024, 
and March 18, 2024 City Council Meetings) 
Council Member Kou expressed desire to add into Community Safety having the Transportation
Department to start working with Stanford Research Park in terms of making sure there are
safe routes from Stanford University residents crossing across Page Mill going toward Fletcher
as well as Gunn High School.   
City Manager Ed Shikada responded that would be covered under both Citywide Bicycle and
Pedestrian Transportation Plan and the Safe Systems project.   
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, agreed those items fall within both of those plans
but also the existing work of the Safe Routes to Schools Team.  
Council Member Kou wanted to make sure that this particular route going across Page Mill on
Peter Coutts will be included into this analysis.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted clarification from Staff on why Living Wisdom was denied
renting extra space from Cubberley. He opined if there are empty rooms they should be rented
to them at market rent.  
City Manager Shikada answered there are a couple of classrooms next to the existing space
being rented by Living Wisdom High School. Staff is currently looking at the appropriate term as
well as terms that would be applicable. There are other requests for space at Cubberley so
there is a question of how that space should be allocated. He stated they would provide
timeline information to Council when available.  
Council Member Burt touched on Item 76. He recalled discussion in the context of HISRAP
funding at the last Finance Committee about certain valued programs that do not fit within the
parameters of the HISRAP funding. The possibility of recognizing a fund that would break off
the funding for certain special events was discussed. He also recalled having received
notification of a federal earmark of an additional half million dollars for fencing along the
Caltrain Corridor. He thought they should set as a capital improvement priority completion of
the fencing on the west side an any other safety and security upgrades to technologies that can
make the tracks safer and more secure. He added that Caltrain is currently moving in a direction
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 10
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/25/2024
of a multiyear period of quarter-wide best practices of safety and security throughout the
corridor. 
City Manager Shikada did not believe they yet have cost estimates for the fencing. He stated
Caltrain believed that earmark would allow for the replacement of existing wrought-iron
fencing along the west side of the tracks from University area through Churchill. The remainder
of the west side of the tracks in Palo Alto is essentially adjacent to residential fencing so if the
City were to undertake that as a project, it would be extending the installation of the wire mesh
fencing adjacent to residential fences. Caltrain is currently working on the designs and cost
estimates and should give a reasonable ballpark of what extending their fencing project would
involve. They expect to have a meeting within the next week to discuss the status. The ongoing
work that came up at the City school’s meeting was the suggestion of the City school’ s liaison
committee becoming more actively involved in the broader topic of youth mental health and
what might be done in cooperation between the two agencies. He stated they are 30 days away
from delivering the capital budget for next year in order to provide a sense of where the
current planning for projects is and that may be the best venue for a discussion of what
flexibility exists and what can be done going forward. He noted the question of what would be
City versus Caltrain projects are still open questions.  
Vice Mayor Lauing supported what Council Member Burt outlined. He would like to see it in the
objectives.  
City Manager Shikada plugged ongoing Mental Health First Aid training programs available to
the community and provided details.  
Vice Mayor Lauing asked if that would encompass Item 81. 
City Manager
Shikada
answered
that would
allow both for the capital
and ongoing
programming support provided by the City and perhaps a placeholder for the Mayor’ s taskforce
work.  
Vice Mayor Lauing queried if he was not quite comfortable having a specific objective around
either the fencing or taking actions to support safety.  
City Manager Shikada thought what was on the line item would provide sufficient overall
objective and a timeframe and they could advance all of the interests that have been
expressed.  
Vice Mayor Lauing questioned taking off all three rail crossings not already underway on Item
93. 
Mr. Kamhi said the next part of this process would be for the Churchill, Meadow and Charleston
crossings. The Palo Alto Quiet Zone has already been initiated in last year’s Council Priorities.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 10
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/25/2024
Vice Mayor Lauing said they were committing in objectives to the first three in addition to the
one that is already addressed to take action on that this year. He asked for a definition for initial
analysis.  
Mr. Kamhi countered the analysis would be a study that needs to be completed in order to
define what is needed to accomplish a quiet zone to get it approved by the CPUC and Caltrain
and community outreach. He said it was a more complex project than Palo Alto Avenue.  
Vice Mayor Lauing brought up wording on Item 84. He surmised the objective was to
implement a new hiring ahead program to achieve those objectives.  
Assistant City Manager Kiely Nose stated one midyear ago, Council provided specific direction
to authorize hire ahead of five officers beyond the current hire ahead authorization levels. This
item speaks toward that more aggressive hire ahead program in order to fill vacancies.  
Police Chief Andrew Binder discussed the process of adding officers to the force and the need
for a constant pipeline of hiring to decrease the lag time in allowing them to start.   
Council Member Veenker referenced Items 77 and 78. She reported that the PRC is considering
sites for the Wellness Center including Cubberley. She wanted to see Cubberley remain in the
mix for that. She reported that some of the Commissioners have expressed concern that
Cubberley may never come through. She commented on the importance of Item 94 and hoped
to continue aggressively pursuing it.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims commented on the pairing between Items 77 and 78. As Chair
of the Cubberley Ad-Hoc, she encouraged Council to let the PRC know that their ad-hoc has
been meeting expeditiously and the desire to reach an outcome with Cubberley. She also
wanted to support Council Member Burt’s statement about means restriction being a critical
component of efforts to support those who struggle with mental health. She supported it being
in the capital plan and also stated as an objective so the public knows it is a component of the
issue they are paying attention to. She added a reminder that grade separation is also meant to
be a means restriction ultimate achievement. Grade separation will take years so in the
meantime there is an issue of better fencing and enhanced detection to bridge that gap. She
described what she viewed to be five components tackling and addressing youth mental health
issues. She referenced Item 81 and asked for an update from Staff on where they are in that
objective.  
Community Services Director Kristen O’Kane explained that a portion of the youth mental
health item is for planning an event being coordinating with their partners at Youth Community
Service, allcove, Project Safety Net and both Paly and Gunn Wellness Centers. The other piece is
partly a placeholder for now. She plans to have a more vetted proposal when they come to
Finance Committee with their budget. She gave examples of what that could include. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 10
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/25/2024
Council Member Burt described a recent Rail Committee discussion about how quiet zones will
contribute to a means restriction. He brought up teens and access to locations and suggested
incentivizing riding versus driving.  
Lupita Alamos, Assistant to the City Manager, asked for Council to discuss and identify
adjustments on the Finance and Policy and Services Standing Committee Workplans.  
Council Member Kou asked for a referral for the Fire Department to bring forward a discussion
of what it will take to ensure Stations 2 and 4 are staffed and are able to respond with engines
that have water.  
Assistant City Manager Nose explained Staff expected to talk to the Finance Committee about a
follow-up on the future of fire staffing both water as well as ambulance and medical services in
the August-November timeframe. She said they would talk about it as part of the FY25 budget
process in May with the Finance Committee as part of the broader discussion over funding, 
resource allocation, etc. Given the financial magnitude to stand up that level of staffing, Staff
would recommend a phased approach.   
Council Member Kou described Ability Path’s services in the community and requested Finance
Committee to consider a $ 250,000 grant in order to move forward with their facilities in
Mitchell Park Place.  
Assistant City Manager Nose remarked the Finance Committee has started to talk about the
types of requests that are coming forward and the programs they have. She said there is not a
formal process that this would typically go through. The resource allocation of funding fits
nicely with the Finance Committee’ s purview as they talk about the budget process in May and
it is within the Committee’ s prerogative to make a recommendation in terms of funding for
something like this. The conversation over the process of bringing these types of requests
forward is part of the workplan they discussed with the Finance Committee as part of the
follow-up associated with the Human Services and special events funding and how they would
navigate these kinds of requests.  
Council Member Kou wanted to find out if in the discussion on the criteria for these grants if it
will take much longer and they might miss out on the opportunity for the FY25 budget.  
Assistant City Manager Nose answered depending on the timing of the need of the funding as
well as the desire of the Council, if there was an immediate need an allocation as part of the
2025 proposed budget process from the Committee would be the most expeditious way. If it
can be fit into a more perspective looking format would have a longer timeframe.  
Council Member Kou asked that the Finance Committee consider the cost of hiring a biologist. 
She discussed ways the City would benefit from this.  
City Manager Shikada commented that Council Member Kou identified a specific position and
raised interest in a topic area. He suggested it would be better to focus on the latter such as
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 10
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/25/2024
where there is an interest in increased resources for that particular function. He thought if it
were referred to the Finance Committee, he thought it would be a discussion in the context of
budget recommendations as to how best to respond to the concern raised. He envisioned
something of Staff responding to this question of how they are resourced to address these
issues and re-engaging in a discussion with the Finance Committee if there is an impression that
is not sufficient and what additional resources might enable them to do. He added that they are
not looking at adding significant staff to this budget given the expectations of revenues for the
upcoming year.  
Council Member Veenker thought it would be helpful to have a referral to explore how they are
resourced with respect to issues like this. She suggested it could include explaining whether
having a dedicated staff member to help them on a variety of issues would be cheaper if they
could avoid retaining certain external resources.  
Council Member Burt was not supportive of a focus on what it would cost to do it but he did
think they needed an understanding of how they currently address those issues and go from
there on what gaps or needs there may be. He was not convinced a single individual would
have the expertise in the range of issues.  
Deputy
City Manager
Chantal
Cotton-Gains discussed
the proposed
Policy & 
Services
Committee 2024 Workplan.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims queried if it would be possible or someone to find the
workplans for the past five years so she could have a greater sense of the context of what this
committee typically covers.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains offered to provide the committee with the actual items that
went to committee over the past five years. To the point of gaps, she added there are a few
items that will be coming in the gaps for the auditor.  
Council Member Veenker wanted to know where they are on the seismic ordinance update on
the pending referrals list.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains said she knows that Staff is following up based off of the
conversation they had with Policy and Services last year in context of other projects they have
going in that department. The follow-up from Committee is that they are still moving forward
with it. She expected an update from the department within this calendar year.  
Council Member Burt stated under “ the Council action needed to retain”, they have an item
from November 2021 to look at strategies to support and strengthen neighborhood programs, 
do a gap analysis, etc. He asked for an update why that has not proceeded and why they need
to have a Council action to get it moving again.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains answered there as a presentation that came to the
committee in 2021 to get more context around what the committee was interested in
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 10
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/25/2024
discussing based off this referral. With the amount of Staff time required for the follow-up, they
have not had that item higher prioritized in the time sense.  
City Manager Shikada believed this was brought forward by a colleague’ s memo including a
proposal to establish a neighborhood ambassador’ s program. He thought the magnitude of
work involved that did not allow it to move forward at the time. Given that they have
progressed on the neighborhood townhalls and related programs, Staff is suggesting that they
need an affirmation from Council whether they want to keep this on the plate.  
Council Member Burt concurred that the specific proposal of this ambassador program was a
particular approach to how they could strengthen their relationships with neighborhood groups
and help support them. He thought it was well taken that the townhalls have been a valuable
step in addressing this broad objective. He was interested in referring back to the Policy and
Services Committee for consideration of what they should do in addition to what they are
doing. He asked what the CalCHA followups meant.  
City Manager Shikada explained CalCHA. He recalled the committee had extensive discussions
on the topic and it was challenging to move forward.    
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains added when the committee heard that there was a question
of the amount of resources it would take to implement such a program in Palo Alto, it was
deemed not the correct fit based off the summary at Committee.  
Council Member Burt recalled they have referred Affordable Housing ways to resource that to
the Housing Ad-Hoc. He wanted to refer working on having templates for annual repeat
agendas for Policy and Service Committee, Finance Committee and Council to Policy and Service
Committee.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims did not see Council’ s direction for P& S and staff to work on an
ordinance on CEDAW in the workplan. She asked if it is because it would be going directly to
Council.  
Deputy City Manager Cotton-Gains responded their plan was to bring it to the full Council
unless their work veers from what was previously discussed with Policy and Services. She
explains that there have been some questions regarding Boards and Commissions and maybe
reviewing the timeline of chairperson selection as well as workplan coming to Council as well as
discussion of some sort between the Commission and City Council. They are going to draft
some ideas to bring to Policy and Services this year related to that. She said it is fine to add it to
the workplan.  
Council Member Kou wondered if the nonprofit services contracts that are expiring in 2025
would be able to be reviewed by Policy and Services for its scope and performance.   
Assistant
City
Manager
Kiely
Nose
answered
there
is
an
outstanding
audit
with
recommendations that Staff is going to pick up that work in the coming months of this year.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 10
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/25/2024
City Manager Shikada confirmed that is a part of the Staff workplan. It has been referred to as
follow-up to the audit on nonprofit agreements. The plan is to come back to City Council with a
study session as soon as the work is underway.  
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to
approve the 2024 Proposed City Council Priorities and Objectives: Community Health, Safety, 
Wellness & Belonging section with the following additional objective: 
1. Enhanced Caltrain safety and security. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to refer the
following to the Finance Committee 2024 Workplan: 
1. Consider a $250k grant for Ability Path to move forward with their facilities at Mitchell
Park Place at 525 East Charleston Road for services. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1, Tanaka no
MOTION:  Mayor Stone moved, seconded by Council Member Veenker to approve the Finance
Committee 2024 Workplan with the additional referral: 
1. Consider a $250k grant for Ability Path to move forward with their facilities at Mitchell
Park Place at 525 East Charleston Road for services. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1, Tanaka no
MOTION:  Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Kou to approve the
Policy & Services Committee 2024 Workplan and refer the following to the Policy & Services
Committee Workplan: 
1. Review of an annual schedule of repeat items that occur annually on agendas for Policy
Services, Finance Committee, and City Council along with the approximate month
they occur; and, 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 10
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/25/2024
2. Establish a frequency for joint City Council meetings or Policy & Services meeting with
Boards and Commissions, Youth Council, and meetings with Boards and Commissions
Chairs; and, 
3. Retain the November 2021 Council referral on neighborhood programs, to request
Policy & Services to review and make recommendations for any initiatives to support
and strengthen neighborhood programs. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
3. 
Policy and Services Recommendation to the City Council for the creation of a Citizens
Advisory
Committee
on
a
Potential
Charter
Amendment
on
Council
Member
Compensation ( Item Continued from March 11, 2024 and March 18, 2024 City Council
Meetings) 
Council Member Kou read the parameters Policy and Services have recommended for City
Council to consider.  
Public Comment: 
1. Liz G. (Zoom) informed that it did not sit well with her that the stipend Council receives
is compared to a minimum wage job. She added that she believed City Council should
talk about how artificial intelligence is impacting minimum wage jobs.  
2. Aram J. ( Zoom) thought an advisory committee with a cross section of the community
would make sense. He did not like that Council Members are elected district wide and
thought they should instead have district representatives. He suggested the wealthy
Council Members decline the stipends and benefits and have Council Members be full
time employees.  
Council Member Veenker asked what the rationale was around the number of 15 members. 
She commented that there is only one category of people and she wondered if it should be
reduced to 11 or add another category. She wondered if the bullet point “ no one currently in
the pipeline to run again” could be better articulated by something akin to what is used with
the Redistricting Commission which she explained.  
Council Member Kou answered the number 15 would bring in more diverse voices.  
Vice Mayor Lauing recalled discussion about a five-person committee made up of people with
expertise with one suggestion being to have some HR experts and a suggestion of having
former Council Members being on there because of their experience. He believed this large
number would take a long time and process to put together. He gravitated back to a 5-person
committee rather than 15 made up from prior Council Members. The process could be that the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 10
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  03/ 25/2024
Mayor could select a diverse group and they could get started immediately to give them a shot
of getting a recommendation to Council this year to possibly make the August ballot deadline.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims spoke to her support for the motion.  
Council Member Burt talked about reasons he did not support the motion. He encouraged his
colleagues to think about other considerations.  
Council Member Tanaka explained his issues with the motion.  
City Manager Ed Shikada wanted Council to be aware that the effort contemplated by this
motion is not on their workplan, the Policy and Services Committee is currently following up on
the referral from the Council to look at an expense reimbursement and two other ballot
measures the City may be sponsoring in November for Quarry Road parkland undedication and
a directly elected mayor.  
Council Member Kou suggested limiting what the income level is for those that will get a salary
in order to have a wider variety of people serving.  
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to create a
Committee of seven (7) members, four (4) of which are former City Council members, with each
Council Member appointing one (1) member, to consider future increases in Council Member
salaries above the guidelines in SB329 ( which for a city the size of Palo Alto is $1600/ month). 
Committee Members must agree not to run for Council for at least 5-years following the
issuance of a recommendation. 
a. If the Committee supports an increase, make a recommendation to the City Council on
amount and timing to be considered by Council.  
b. If the committee recommends no increase, provide to the City Council rationale for the
decision.  
MOTION PASSED:  4-3, Burt, Kou, Tanaka no
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 8:15 P.M. 
