CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 25 
 Special Meeting 
 
June 18, 2024 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 4:00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, 
Veenker 
Council Member Tanaka Arrived at 6:38 P.M. 
Present Remotely:  
Absent: 
 
Action Items 
AA4. Discussion Regarding Caltrans’ Repaving Project on El Camino Real 
Replacing Existing Parking with Bicycle Lanes, Authority for Staff to 
Make Adjustments to the Residential Preferential Parking Permit 
Programs and Return to Council on Consent if Needed, Authority for 
Staff to Enter into Agreements As Needed to Provide Temporary Safe 
Parking Along the Corridor in Palo Alto, and Approval of a Resolution 
Supporting the Removal of On-Street Parking for this Project; CEQA 
status – categorically exempt. Item Continued from June 17, 2024 City 
Council Meeting, Presentation 
Limited Public Testimony on portions of this Agenda Item may be 
taken at the discretion of the Council at the June 18th City Council 
Meeting. 
June 17, 2024 original report and material for this item can be found 
here* (Agenda Item Number 31). On June 17th the Council Received 
Public Testimony; the Item Was Continued to June 18 for further 
Council 
Deliberation 
and 
Action. 
https://cityofpaloalto.primegov.com/Portal/Meeting?meetingTemplateI
d=14311 
PUBLIC COMMENT (CONTINUED): 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
1. 
Mark S. supported the Staff recommendation to work with Caltrans to 
implement the El Camino repaving and bike project, which is 
consistent with the City's climate, transportation, health, and equity 
goals.  
2. 
Eric N. felt narrowed lanes would reduce speeding on El Camino Real. 
He hoped Caltrans would take the Staff suggestion to ban right turns 
on red on the Safe Streets to School routes that cross ECR. He felt 
the improved sightlines from removing parking would improve safety 
and asked the Council to support safety.  
3. 
Galen F., owner of Sundance Steakhouse, objected to removing 
parking on El Camino to make room for a bike lane. He noted his 
business relies on parking and that a bike lane does not belong on a 
six-lane highway. He requested measures to include suitable 
employee and guest parking.  
4. 
Tony L., owner Stanford Coin Wash laundromat on El Camino Real, 
explained his customers rely on convenience and ease of access 
when parking in front of the store. He stated parking along ECR is 
vital to businesses without parking lots and removing it would kill 
businesses and negatively impact lives of customers.  
5. 
Maarten L. strongly advocated for the No Right Turn on Red 
restriction to make biking safer on El Camino. He felt putting bike 
lanes on El Camino might not be perfect for everybody but would be 
a huge step forward in making Palo Alto the bike friendly and 
environmentally city it wants to be. He urged Council to vote in favor 
of bike lanes on El Camino.  
6.  Katherine D. supported the PTA Executive Committee's recent vote to 
support adding No Right Turn on Red restrictions to the school 
commute crossings.  
7.  Lara A. and the Palo Alto Council of PTAs strongly supported the Staff 
recommendation to add No Right Turn on Red restrictions to the 
school commute crossings and other heavily used bike and 
pedestrian crossings on El Camino Real. She asked Council to vote in 
support of this item.  
8.  Ken K. (Zoom), an advocate with Silicon Valley Bike Coalition, felt 
the most critical safety enhancement along this corridor was 
removing parking to establish clear sightlines and listed ways to 
mitigate impacts on businesses and educate the community.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
9.  Jesse C. (Zoom) supported the No Right Turn on Reds. He felt the 
bike lane would greatly enhance safety, which should come first, and 
that local businesses could adapt.  
10.  Becky (Zoom) was unsure there was data that taking away parking 
on El Camino was the greatest good for the greatest number of 
people. She was disappointed the program to make Park Boulevard 
the preferred bike route was canceled.  
11.  Penny E. (Zoom) spoke in favor of No Right Turn on Red restrictions 
for ECR and way-finding signage to the parallel Wilkie Park Bike 
Boulevard for bicyclists who want a quieter route.  
12. Kayla F. (Zoom) strongly supported measures to improve biking 
safety along and near El Camino and was specifically in favor of the 
No Right Turn on Red restrictions recommended by Staff.  
13.  Dylan F. (Zoom) supported the bike lanes and No Turn on Red 
signage.  
14.  Temina M. (Zoom) supported the proposed No Turn on Red 
restrictions and the creation of bike lanes along El Camino Real. She 
noted a lot of people in Palo Alto do not have cars and rely on safe 
bicycle transit to get kids to school.  
15. Sandhya L., Deputy Director at Silicon Valley Bicycle Coalition, 
speaking on behalf of Guiliano, Michael, Frank, Stephen, Zafarali, 
was excited about all the improvements this project is bringing: 
reduced lane widths, increased improvements at intersections, No 
Right Turn on Red, all of which will reduce speeds and significantly 
reduce the number of crashes on the corridor. She encouraged Staff 
to prioritize working with Caltrans to include all the improvements 
not already in this project through the City's 2025 Bike/Ped Plan and 
to fund and prioritize future projects to elevate this to the next level. 
She also pushed for a 5-foot bike lane in the underpass section by 
narrowing lane widths to 10 and 11 feet to close the only gap this 
current project has.  
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, reviewed the Council motion of 
April 1, 2024, regarding safety improvements, parking alternatives, and 
RV/vehicle dwellers. Caltrans has committed to expediting encroachment 
permits on El Camino Real. He presented some example conditions Council 
might consider incorporating into the recommendation as well as the Staff 
recommendation.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
Council Member Burt explained that when this came up April 1, he was 
concerned that the proposal of painting bike lanes on El Camino without 
other safety improvements and without a parking mitigation plan would not 
be a net gain for the community. He noted that Staff worked along with 
Caltrans on this item and asked for clarification on the authority Caltrans has 
in parking on El Camino.  
Molly Stump, City Attorney, responded that El Camino Real is a state 
highway. Caltrans has the authority to design, redesign, and reconfigure the 
street in the way they deem appropriate even over the City's objection. 
Caltrans has the authority to restrict parking on the street.  
Council Member Burt continued that the City did not have a great deal of 
leverage in this matter, yet were able to drastically improve the outcome 
with extensive safety measures. He felt a parking mitigation plan was 
extremely important and planned to include that in the motion. He believed 
it was compelling that Safe Routes to School and the PTA Council have fully 
endorsed this proposal as their mission is to assure students have safe ways 
to get to school, with a big focus on all of the intersections on El Camino that 
did not exist in April's proposal. In addition to new housing, the growing 
trend of E-bikes and other micro-mobility vehicles will also be a big part of 
the use of El Camino going forward, and he supported the current proposal.  
Vice Mayor Lauing noted that in the April motion, he felt giving up more 
parking for a little bit more safety on El Camino was not worth it. The ad hoc 
was started and worked hard with Staff and VTA. The focus for Caltrans was 
to fix the street, and they stated and restated that the decision to put bike 
lanes there and remove parking was unchangeable. The discussions 
therefore focused on safety. He stated the group virtually walked each block 
of El Camino and looked at it block by block. Caltrans accepted a lot of 
suggestions and there are a number of ideas they are still considering, such 
as flashing lights on the back of buses when they are going to pull over, 
which would make it safer for bikes behind them. Caltrans has also agreed 
to work on better situations over time. There has been good progress on 
looking through possibilities for relocation of RVs. The remaining issue is 
parking mitigation, which has to be done very thoroughly. The direction of 
the ad hoc was to make this safer, and that has happened.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked if there were pictures to show what a 
class 4 bike facility is in contrast to other options.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi presented a picture of an example of 
separated bike and car lanes and types of physical barriers. 
 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
Aung Maung, Caltrans, added that the raised curbs are about 3 inches tall 
and the channelizer would be around 2 feet high.  
Council Member Veenker described an example in a sibling city with a 2-way 
bike lane on one side of a busy road and a 2-foot curb sweeping into the far 
right traffic lane near the intersection and then creating a bus boarding 
island. She asked about the process to explore physical barriers and the cost 
element. She also supported No Turn on Red at the designated locations and 
the parking mitigation.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi explained the current design proposal 
Caltrans has provided includes curb but is different than what Council 
Member Veenker described, which is a lot of concrete work and goes beyond 
the scope possible for this type of project. However, it is something Caltrans 
has committed to looking at in a future project.  
Ed Shikada, City Manager, added the devices being proposed consider both 
ease of installation as well as maintenance. There are also considerations of 
where busses are pulling in and out and where there are driveways or 
conflicts with traffic. Ultimately the designs are a Caltrans prerogative.  
Council Member Kou recalled that Caltrans had said that the City's stretch of 
El Camino would be up to the City. She asked if they had rescinded that. She 
was in support of No Right Turn on Red. She stated the parking mitigations 
have not been talked about and would divide the small businesses and 
residents. She questioned if a state highway was the best place to do this. 
She wanted to support small businesses and was also concerned about the 
safety of buses going into the bike lane, causing bikes to veer into traffic or 
onto the sidewalk. She suggested Caltrans should repair the road and Palo 
Alto should watch to see what happens in other cities that have approved 
bicycles for El Camino. She noted the lack of enforcement for bicyclists. She 
was also offended by the use of the word vulnerable in this regard as there 
is already a vulnerable population of people who are functionally and 
intellectually disabled.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi explained Caltrans had not given a direct 
response as to whether they would do this without City approval. However, 
legally this is their facility and they can do this. He also thought that because 
they have mentioned several times that they have identified it as a safety 
concern, they have liability issues should they not do something following 
this.  
Mayor Stone asked if Staff or the ad hoc had reached out to residents 
associations in the impacted neighborhoods regarding the distribution of 
RPPs and expending that to additional employee permits.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi believed that 10 to 15 permits would be 
distributed per zone in Southgate and Evergreen Park-Mayfield. He noted 
that would not be the solution on its own and would want the TMA engaged 
to discuss options.  
Mayor Stone explained a petition was received from 22 business owners 
along El Camino Real alleging they felt misled about the number of parking 
spots to be removed. He asked for information about the outreach to 
businesses. He questioned why the City would be expected to maintain the 
bike lanes and potentially be liable for accidents within the channelizers if 
Caltrans owns the road and has concerns for liability if they did not make 
these changes.  
Steve Guagliardo, Assistant to the City Manager, stated the reaction of 
business owners was largely consistent with the survey response, generally 
opposed to the removal of parking along ECR. He stated Staff tried to make 
clear the proposal of removal of all parking along ECR and what options 
could be available to help manage and mitigate those issues. There were 
also site visits and face-to-face conversations, and he anticipated continuing 
those conversations to find solutions.  
Nate Baird, Parking Manager, noted the employee parking permit program in 
Palo Alto was unique. The previous 290 permits in Evergreen Park-Mayfield 
had been reduced to the permits on ECR. There is room to move some of 
those back in, but it is a very sensitive conversation. There is additional 
availability in the garages and lots. He stated Staff felt about 40 to 50 
permits in the Evergreen Park-Mayfield neighborhood was reasonable and 
that Southgate would have a minimal impact.  
Tim Shimizu, Assistant City Attorney, explained that Caltrans has the 
responsibility to maintain its road, including channelizers. If they wanted the 
City to maintain the channelizers or any other kind of improvement, Caltrans 
would have to enter into a maintenance agreement with the City. The City 
could then be held more responsible and more liable if someone got into an 
accident or filed a claim against the City and Caltrans, whereas currently the 
City is not liable because there is no maintenance agreement. In terms of 
taking on that obligation, the City would have to consider whether the 
potential liability is balanced out by the potential benefits of having 
channelizers. The basis for this request from Caltrans is that they do not 
have the staffing to maintain the channelizers even though it is their new 
standard. Ultimately such an agreement would most likely have to be 
approved by Council and it would probably be revisited should the 
agreement be negotiated.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
Mayor Stone felt it was odd that Caltrans would move forward with the 
project regardless of the City's agreement and the City would still be held 
liable for injuries.  
City Manager Shikada understood the channelizers were considered an 
enhancement and if Caltrans proceeded with the project without the City's 
willingness to maintain them, they would do the striping but not the 
channelizers.  
Mr. Maung added that since Caltrans is the owner of the facility, they will be 
responsible for it. The discussion about liability was regarding if the City 
failed to maintain it and an accident happened due to lack of maintenance. 
The City would then be partially liable if the City and Caltrans agreed the 
City would maintain those elements.  
Council Member Burt believed the issue of maintenance and liability was part 
of what still needed to be negotiated and was hopeful there would be 
progress on that topic. He noted VTA has agreed to provide 500 passes at 
$90 apiece, which opens the door for businesses and potentially Buena Vista 
Mobile Home Park residents and others parking in that area. He also 
described that with a 400-space parking garage installed and increased 
hybrid work, there was a huge amount of parking in the Evergreen 
neighborhood and this proposal would return a fraction of the previously 
permitted number of workers and not have a significant impact.  
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member 
Lythcott-Haims, to: 
A. Authorize the City Manager or their designee to direct staff to make 
necessary adjustments to the RPP Programs and return to Council, 
B. Authorize the City Manager or their designee to enter into agreements 
as needed to provide temporary safe parking for those currently along 
the project corridor in Palo Alto, and 
C. Approve a resolution supporting the removal of on-street parking for 
this project. 
Conditions to include: 
1. Transmittal of the Fehr & Peers review memo and the joint City and 
VTA memo (Attachments A & D) to Caltrans with a request that 
Caltrans respond to requested changes  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
2. Development of a new Maintenance and Liability Agreement with 
Caltrans for the bikeway project  
3. A Caltrans commitment to expediting encroachment permits on El 
Camino Real  
4. Caltrans provision of tentative and final project timelines, when 
available, for public notification efforts 
5. Parking mitigation plan: Adjustments to the RPP program with 
outreach to the business and neighborhood stakeholders, provision of 
the VTA smart passes through PATMA for workers, restrictions on 
short-term parking locations expanded on side streets immediately 
adjacent to El Camino, a program to relocate RV dwellers and provide 
bike racks 
6. Continue to work with VTA and Caltrans to pilot bus stops designs 
installation 
7. Monitor and measure mode shift and collision outcomes 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims was grateful to Staff who were working to 
secure a location for the RV dweller community on the side of El Camino 
Real.  
Vice Mayor Lauing agreed this may not be the best place to put bike lanes 
but Caltrans will unquestionably do this without the City's consent. He felt 
the City needed to make the best of it and be very committed to mitigating 
the parking issue. He was pleased with the progress and safety and believed 
there was a multistage plan to make it even safer.  
Council Member Veenker supported the motion. She stated there was 
concern about the safety of bikes along a state highway but she was also 
concerned about cars parked along the same highway, with drivers walking 
into traffic to get into their cars and opening doors into traffic. There are 
already bicyclists on the road, and she wanted to make it a safer situation.  
There was discussion about the wording of the motion. 
Council Member Kou stated that the City will be losing a lot of parking 
spaces while hoping for more businesses, with ADUs that do not require 
parking, with high rises and mixed use housing that will have less parking. 
She thought this needed to be looked at with more reality.  
Mayor Stone thought this was a significant improvement from the April 
proposal. Caltrans is making these changes along El Camino in neighboring 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
cities, and it is ultimately their decision. It is better to work with Caltrans to 
improve designs. Safety has to be the number one priority. He supported the 
motion. 
MOTION PASSED: 5-1-1, Kou no, Tanaka absent 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING 
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member 
Lythcott-Haims, to: 
8. City-proposed locations in Attachment E for additional No Right Turn 
on Red restrictions 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Tanaka absent 
 
PUBLIC COMMENT 
1. Jenny K. provided an update on the Barron Park Donkey Project, including 
a recent community event and several news media features.  
2. Aram J. expressed anger at the Council for not agendizing discussion 
about a ceasefire.  
3. Ken H. discussed Cubberley and felt it was an important issue. He hoped 
the upcoming election would allow this to move forward.  
 
COUNCIL MEMBER QUESTIONS, COMMENTS AND ANNOUNCEMENTS 
Vice Mayor Lauing reported out on the Chief Administrative Officers 
Committee, which recently met to evaluate the process of the 2024 reviews 
of the Chief Administrative Officers. He listed items that were discussed and 
noted that the Committee recommended being more thorough and strategic. 
Interviews will start as soon as July and a packet will be sent to the Council 
shortly. Separately, by Q2 of '25, the Committee wanted to have a 
document to bring new council members up to speed.  
Council Member Kou suggested the Stanford Ad Hoc Committee may put a 
report out in August. She asked the City Manager to communicate with 
Stanford to update when they have the story poles up at the El Camino Park.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
Mayor Stone announced an allocation from the Council Contingency Fund to 
Neighbors Abroad in the amount of $5000 for video technology expenses 
related to sibling cities, USA Town Halls, and public events cosponsored by 
the City.  
 
STUDY SESSION 
1. 
Study Session: Report from the Human Relations Commission 
regarding their Research on the Lived Experience of Asian American, 
Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders; CEQA status – not a project 
Item Removed Off Agenda 
 
CONSENT CALENDAR 
2. 
Approval of 1) Construction Contract No. C24190876 with Valentine 
Corporation in the Amount of $667,369 and Authorization for the City 
Manager or Their Designee to Negotiate and Execute Change Orders 
for Related Additional but Unforeseen Work that May Develop During 
the Project Up to a Not-to-Exceed Amount of $100,105; and 2) 
Amendment No. 1 to Contract No. S24189099 with H.T. Harvey & 
Associates in an Amount Not to Exceed $131,732, for Biological 
Compliance and Post Construction Monitoring and Restoration, for the 
Baylands Boardwalk Pilings Repair Project Capital Improvement 
Program PE-24000; CEQA status – exempt under CEQA Guidelines 
Section 15301 
3. 
Approval of Amendment No. 3 to Contract Number C21180324 with 
Canopy in the Amount of $376,550 and to Extend Contract Term for 
One Year for Continued Implementation of Urban Forest Master Plan 
Programs, and Approval of a Budget Amendment in the General Fund; 
CEQA Status - Exempt Under CEQA Guidelines Section 15308 
4. 
Approval of Amendment Number 5 to Contract Number C20176363 
With Magellan in the Amount of $1,122,121 to Incorporate Additional 
Design and Technical Services for the Fiber-to-the-Premises (FTTP) 
Pilot Project for a Revised Total Not-to-Exceed of $6,807,412 Over a 
Five-and-a-Half-Year Term; CEQA Status – Not a Project 
5. 
Approval of General Services Contract Number C25188309 with Cintas 
Corporation in the Amount of $2,124,293 to Provide for Rental and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
Laundering of Work Uniforms and Miscellaneous Items for a Period of 
Five Years; CEQA Status – Not a Project. 
6. 
Approval of Contract Number C25190507 with OverDrive in an Amount 
Not to Exceed $200,000 to Provide Library Electronic Content ("E-
Content") for a Period of Two Years; CEQA status – not a project. 
7. 
Approval of Professional Service Contract Number C25191000 with 
Grassroots Ecology in an Amount Not-to-Exceed $612,027 for Land 
Stewardship Services at Pearson-Arastradero Preserve for a period of 
Five Years; CEQA status – categorically exempt. 
8. 
Approval of a Memorandum of Understanding for a Countywide Food 
Recovery Program; CEQA Status – Exempt under CEQA Guidelines 
Section 15308 
AA1.  Approval of (1) Professional Services Contract No. C24187724 with 
LensLock, Inc in Amount Not to Exceed $1,181,400 for Replacement of 
the Police Public Contact Audio/Video System for a Period of Five (5) 
Years; (2) Police Audio/Video Technology Surveillance Use Policy; and 
(3) Approve a Budget Amendment in the Supplemental Law 
Enforcement Services Fund and Capital Improvement Fund (2/3 vote 
required); CEQA status – not a project 
AA2. Recommend City Council Approval of Various Task Orders with Baker 
Tilly for Internal Audit Services 1) Extend deadline for FY 2024 Task 
Orders Task 1: Citywide Risk Assessment, Task 2: Preparation of 
Annual Audit Plan, Task 3: Selection of External Financial Auditor and 
Annual Audit Coordination, 2) Execute New FY 2025 Task 5: 
Preparation of Quarterly Reports, Annual Status Reports, Provision of 
City Hotline and Other Ongoing Office Administrative Functions, and 3) 
Amend the budget for FY 2024 Task Orders as Recommended by the 
Policy & Services Committee; CEQA Status – Not a Project. 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
1. 
Herb B. (Item 4) thought this was the wrong direction for FTTP. He 
suspected the same thing would happen as with other things the 
City has promised and only delivered in some neighborhoods. He 
believed that if the City was involved in transactions, rates would 
be subject to Proposition 218.  
 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member 
Veenker, to approve Agenda Item Numbers 2-8, AA1, AA2. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Tanaka absent 
 
CITY MANAGER COMMENTS  
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, had no updates since the meeting the previous 
day.  
The Council took a 15-minute break and returned at 6:30 P.M. 
 
ACTION ITEMS 
9. 
Adoption of the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) FY 
2024-25 Annual Action Plan and the Adoption of a Resolution 
Approving Use of CDBG and CDBG CARES Act (CDBG-CV) Funds for FY 
2024-25, and Approval of a Budget Amendment in the Community 
Development Block Grant Fund. 
Rebecca Atkinson, Planner, reviewed the proposed sub-recipients and FY 
2024-2025 funding levels consistent with Human Relations Commission 
recommendations. She presented the Staff recommendation.  
Council Member Kou asked why there were so much unspent funds from 
previous years. She questioned if the 20-percent cap for planning and 
administration gets the City full cost recovery. She wanted information on 
applicants that did not get approved. She asked what qualified fire station 
sidewalks to be included in the new facilities improvement.  
Ms. Atkinson responded that unspent funds were the result of CDBG 
recipients declining funds because they no longer wanted to continue the 
project or the project came in under bid. She noted that one proposed 
subrecipient did not receive funds because they were determined not to be 
eligible. She explained the sidewalk improvements included ADA sidewalks 
and curb cuts, which are a presumed benefit.  
Jonathan Lait, Planning Director, did not believe it was a full cost recovery 
expense relative to the cost provided to the consultant and the Staff time for 
additional work.  
MOTION: Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Mayor Stone, to: 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
1. Adopt the draft Fiscal Year (FY) 2024-25 Annual Action Plan (AAP, 
Attachment A) and the associated CDBG FY 2024-25 Annual Action 
Plan Resolution (Attachment B) allocating Community Development 
Block Grant (CDBG) and CDBG CARES Act (CDBG-CV) funding for FY 
2024-25; and 
2. Authorize the City Manager to execute the FY 2024-25 CDBG 
application to fund the FY 2024-25 Annual Action Plan and associated 
documents concerning the application, and to otherwise bind the City 
with respect to the applications and commitment of funds; and 
3. Authorize staff to submit the Fiscal Year 2024-25 AAP (Attachment A) 
to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) by 
the July 6, 2024, deadline; and 
4. Authorize the City Manager or designee to draft and execute a loan 
agreement, regulatory agreement, and related documents necessary 
to implement City Council direction on the Alma Garden Rehabilitation 
Project in a form consistent with the City’s affordable housing loan 
documents and approved by the City Attorney. 
5. Amend the Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Appropriation for the Community 
Development Block Grant Fund (2/3 vote needed) by: 
a. Increasing Revenue from Other Agencies by $1,157,286 
b. Increasing General Expenses by $1,157,286 
Mayor Stone was confident the HRC did a thorough job of vetting CDBG 
applications and trusted the recommendation.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
 
10. 
PUBLIC HEARING/QUASI-JUDICIAL. Buena Vista Mobile Home Park 
Redevelopment/3980 
El 
Camino 
Real 
[24PLN-00041]: 
Provide 
Direction on Applicant’s Request for Amendments to the Existing 
Regulatory Agreement and Proposed Application for a Streamlined 
Housing Development Review to Allow the Redevelopment of the 
Buena Vista Village Mobile Home Park. The Proposed Development 
Would Result in Two Parcels, One Featuring a new 61-Unit, 100% 
Affordable Housing, Multi-Family Apartment Building and Associated 
Work Within the Right-of-Way; and the Second Parcel Featuring a 
Renovated 44-Unit Mobile Home Park, Which is Under State 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
Jurisdictional Authority. Environmental Assessment: Exempt from the 
Provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act in Accordance 
with CEQA Guidelines Section 15332 (In-fill Development). Zoning 
District: RM-20. 
Claire Raybould, Principal Planner, explained the project before the Council 
relates to two key components of the redevelopment: amending the existing 
regulatory agreement and review of the 61-unit multifamily apartment 
development. The proposed apartment building would be on a 1.69-acre 
parcel, with 44 mobile homes developed on the remaining 2.38-acre parcel. 
The apartments would be 100 percent affordable, and the project qualifies 
for an 80-percent density bonus accordingly. The applicant is proposing four 
concessions and five waivers for minor adjustments to code requirements. 
She reviewed the key design modifications. The Regulatory Amendment was 
modified from one agreement with 100 units to two agreements with 105 
units.  
Melissa McDonough, Assistant to the City Manager, discussed resident 
outreach by the Housing Authority.  
Planner Raybould reviewed the next steps and the Staff recommendation.  
Preston Prince, Executive Director Santa Clara County Housing Authority, 
spoke about the goals of the project.  
Fred Pollock, Architect, noted the mobile home and apartment building will 
have joint open space, joint amenities, utility improvements, and 
improvements to the Los Robles frontage that will benefit the greater 
community. The open space at the center of the community connects to both 
the mobile home park and the apartment building and is framed by 
amenities easily accessed by both sides. He detailed the refinements 
addressed after input from the Architectural Review Board: providing an 
additional entry on Los Robles, consolidating utilities, refining the façade 
articulation, and increasing tree planting in the parking lot.  
Executive Director Prince presented the proposed changes in the Regulatory 
Agreement.  
Mahealani Ah Yun, City Clerk, noted there was translation service available 
for those who need it. This was translated into Spanish by a member of the 
public.  
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
1. 
Winter D., speaking on behalf of Andie R., Gerry M., Jeff G., Marilyn 
K., and Mary S., supported this project as a safer, prettier, more 
comfortable home place for Buena Vistans. She questioned how it is 
assured the missing documents and reports needed for final approval 
will meet the standard. She wanted a Palo Alto live or work 
preference for housing at Buena Vista. She asked how many 
replacement trees would be planted and if more shade trees could be 
planted near treeless mobile home groupings. She questioned the 
hard deadline for households to declare their choice to return as 
mobile home owners/renters or to leave permanently and when 
residents will know where they are to live before they are relocated. 
She wanted to know the plan for a substitute meeting place for the 
homework club during relocation and also the plan for private 
transport during relocation. She suggested safety signage be 
installed near both driveways for safe biking. She was disappointed 
the ARB did not accept the color palate chosen by the residents. She 
felt street naming was important.  
2. 
Dich T., Buena Vista resident, felt it was of more benefit to have all 
of the units be rentals. 
3. 
Jonathan G. supported the remodel of the park. He noted the road 
that separates the proposed condos from the mobile home is directly 
opposite the entrance to his complex and requested the road be 
moved 100 yards down to decrease traffic through the neighboring 
complex.  
4. 
Herb B. raised a question of bias as he believed Council Member 
Veenker had been involved with one of the groups helping Buena 
Vista. He also felt there needed to be protection to ensure that down 
the road there was not an attempt to remove the remaining 
ownership of the individual mobile homes and create another 
multifamily development.  
Council Member Burt asked where the updated tree plan stood and whether 
there was a commitment to update it in response to concerns raised. He felt 
the current canopy, even with mature trees, was inadequate and that the 
priority was for replanting on site. He asked if there would be a preference 
for new residents who already live or work in Palo Alto.  
Planner Raybould explained a tree planting plan was provided in the 
development but did not include updates anticipated to be made in response 
to public comments related to changes in tree species for the mobile home 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
portion of the site. She was not aware of plans for additional canopy and 
screening.  
Mr. Pollock noted for the entire site, both parcels, 84 trees would be 
removed and 128 were proposed to be replanted, on site and adjacent in the 
frontage.  
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, believed the apartment portion of 
the project complied with the tree replacement requirements. The tree 
ordinance does not apply to the mobile home park. However, this is a three-
party agreement between the City Council, the County and the Housing 
Authority, so the Council could approach the conversation in that forum.  
Mr. Prince stated they were very interested in having a Palo Alto preference. 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims wanted this community to look like any 
other in Palo Alto, lush with trees. She also requested more trees, as a 
climate and safety issue. She was also interested in a second look at the 
color palette and agreed with the Palo Alto live/work preference. She asked 
if the units count toward the City's RHNA.  
Planner Raybould explained the units have already been counted toward 
RHNA and cannot be counted again.  
Erik Jensen, Landscape Architect, added that the lack of trees along Los 
Robles had to do with sub-grade utility conditions and the 10-foot Valley 
Water easement, where trees cannot be planted. He noted they were able to 
meet City requirements for tree replacement on the remainder of the site 
and planting off site, also using climate-adaptive native or naturalized trees 
to fit with the existing canopy. He thought it would have a year-round 
predominantly evergreen condition, giving a lot of shade and helping with 
the heat island effect.  
Vice Mayor Lauing felt the objective design standards were well arbitrated. 
He asked if the amenities the residents felt were important, like play areas 
and homework club with computers, were all accepted. He wanted an update 
on the applicants getting placements. He questioned the missing materials 
or documents mentioned in public comment. He noted the City does not 
have jurisdiction over the mobile home park, yet ARB changed the colors. He 
asked if the City could request more consideration for the other agencies to 
comment on.  
Flaherty Ward, Santa Clara County Housing Authority, explained the 
requested amenities have all been incorporated into the design. She stated 
that last time she came to Council, about 65 percent of households had 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
affirmed a housing decision, and as of today, it was 76 percent. She 
discussed upcoming one-on-one meetings with households to update offers 
based on new appraisals and provide additional details on the relocation 
impacts. She believed this would result in more households affirming their 
housing decision within the next six weeks or so.  
Planner Raybould responded that the documentation to support the 
exemption for CEQA was not yet complete. She stated the tentative map 
was a separate application but was hoped to move forward in August.  
Jonathan Lait, Planning Director, explained that the City does not have 
discretion over the color scheme and the applicant can do what they want 
with colors.  
There was further discussion about tree planting. 
Council Member Kou asked when the residents would know where and when 
they will be relocated. She also wanted to know about the questions of 
transportation during the relocation and the homework club. She asked for 
an explanation on the AMI up to 120% on the Regulatory Agreement.  
Ms. Ward explained that given the Palo Alto housing market, they would 
begin to secure housing potentially 120 days before a household needs to 
move. Families will meet with advisors in the coming weeks and answer 
questions about their needs (how many children in school and where they 
attend, any mobility issues, pets, need for storage), which will be used to 
find housing. She noted the Housing Authority remains committed to making 
sure children get to school but there is not a plan yet because the 
placements and household needs have not been determined. She stated she 
would add the homework club to the list of things to discuss with the school 
district.  
Sarah White, Santa Clara County Housing Authority, explained that the 
Regulatory Agreement captures potential over-income residents that live at 
BV currently and wish to return to the park. It has the same basic structure, 
40 percent of the units at 30% AMI, 40 percent at 50% AMI, and 20 percent 
at 80% AMI, with a provision to calculate rent for those over 80% and over 
120% AMI.  
Council Member Veenker discussed that she was a volunteer on the Board of 
the Law Foundation of Silicon Valley, never received compensation, and 
resigned when she became a council member to avoid conflict of interest. 
She asked why it was necessary to remove existing trees on Los Robles and 
wondered if there were modifications that might preserve any. She 
questioned the paving material contemplated in the mobile home park and if 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
there was anything that could be used to reduce the heat island effect. She 
asked if there any mediation services had been explored regarding relocation 
services.  
 
Planner Raybould explained those trees were being removed to put a 
sidewalk in the area and redevelop the frontage for utilities and lighting. 
There had been discussion and confirmation of why each of the trees was 
being removed.  
Mr. Pollock responded that asphalt would be used for the paving, but the 
paving area would be reduced in the park, with additional non-asphalted 
areas.  
Ms. Ward noted that mediation was looked into. She felt the next steps of 
providing residents more details about specifics would help the outlying 
residents who have not made a decision.  
Assistant to the City Manager McDonough described various efforts to 
resolve residents' concerns, a lot of which have been resolved with the help 
of third parties.  
Council Member Tanaka asked for clarification on the removal of obsolete 
references in the Regulatory Agreement. He questioned why the units would 
not be made available as low-income if the resident is able to afford regular 
housing. He wondered if it would be more beneficial to build 100 units and 
make the rest park land.  
Ms. Ward explained that when the park was purchased, there was a piece of 
the property residents resided in that was not able to be purchased from the 
previous owner and was the leased land described in the original agreement. 
There are no longer households residing there and no reason for it to appear 
in the new agreement. With the redevelopment, when people move back in, 
there will be a rent adjustment depending on the income level, so there is no 
more need for the concept of base rent. She described that the rent will be 
adjusted to market eventually based on income, but rent increases will 
slowly happen over time rather than all at once. She also explained that a 
commitment was made in saving the park to provide mobile home ownership 
opportunities for the residents who lived there. The resulting plan tries to 
balance the desire for a denser site while honoring the mobile home owners 
that wish to remain as mobile home owners.  
Council Member Kou questioned the Regulatory Agreement regarding 
reinvestment.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
Ms. Ward gave background that affordable housing projects have to include 
something to explain what happens if ownership changes hands. She 
explained the Housing Authority has no intention of selling the property, but 
if that were to happen, the Housing Authority would reinvest the proceeds in 
Palo Alto to build more affordable housing. It is a scenario that is very 
unlikely to happen but had to be clear in the agreement.  
Planner Raybould noted that changes in state law mean that deed-restricted 
units being rented or sold in the last five years cannot be converted to 
market rate development or demolished and not replaced.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims stated Barron Park does not have sidewalks. 
It is not necessarily considered an improvement to add a sidewalk, so she 
wondered if the trees could be preserved. She asked if the two-way main 
streets in the mobile home portion were sizable enough for a small 
roundabout with a tree in the middle. She wanted to know what the budget 
increase would be to plant bigger trees at the outset and not wait 15 years 
for the canopy.  
Mr. Pollock believed the tree sizes and timeline were consistent with City 
regulations. He explained the Los Robles frontage would connect with an 
existing sidewalk directly to the south.  
Director Lait described that the larger tree installed takes longer for the 
canopy to grow. The 24-inch box replacements start out small but catch up 
to the more mature trees through their growth pattern.  
MOTION: Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kou, to:  
1. Return on the August 5, 2024, City Council Meeting following the 
completion of the environmental analysis for a decision on the 
Streamlined Housing Development Review application and to authorize 
the City Manager to Execute the amended Regulatory Agreements with 
the following: 
a. Consider whether any trees can be preserved on Los Robles; and, 
b. Whether a surface treatment on the pavement can reduce heat 
island concerns; and, 
c. Whether larger trees or additional trees can be planted on the 
Mobile Home Park; and, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
d. All reasonable efforts to resolve disputes standing in the way of 
housing decisions; and, 
e. Whether color choices may be returned to the resident preference; 
and, 
f. Pursue a Palo Alto worker resident preference. 
There was discussion about the wording of the motion and whether to bring 
back the item on consent.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
The Council took a 5-minute break, returning at 8:50 P.M. 
  
11. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of a Resolution Implementing the North 
Ventura Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP), Amending the City’s 
Comprehensive Plan and Certifying the Supplemental Environmental 
Impact Report, Including a Statement of Overriding Considerations; 
and FIRST READING: an Ordinance Adding Chapter 18.29 and 
Amending Chapters 18.14, 18.24, and 16.65 in the Palo Alto Municipal 
Code as Well as Amendments to the Zoning District Map, and Rezoning 
of Parcels Within the NVCAP area. CEQA Status -- Supplemental 
Environmental Impact Report SCH #2023020691. Item Removed Off 
Agenda and Deferred to August 5, 2024 City Council Meeting. 
 
AA3. Selection of Rail Grade Separation Alternatives for Churchill Avenue, 
Meadow Drive, and Charleston Road Crossings for the Advancement of 
the Alternatives into the Preliminary Engineering and Environmental 
Documentation phase; CEQA status – statutorily exempt under CEQA 
section 15262 (feasibility and planning study) (Item Continued from 
June 10, 2024) New Item added – Limited Public Testimony on 
portions of this Agenda Item may be taken at the discretion of the 
Council at the June18th City Council Meeting. 
June 10, 2024 original report and material for this item can be found 
here* (Agenda Item Number 13). On June 10th the Council Received 
Presentations and Public Testimony; the Item Was Continued to June 
18 
for 
further 
Council 
Deliberation 
and 
Action. 
https://cityofpaloalto.primegov.com/Portal/Meeting?meetingTemplateI
d=14305 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
1. 
Michael W. asked the Council to approve moving forward with the 
hybrid for more engineering study for grade separation in South Palo 
Alto and to retract the underpass option.  
2. 
Steve E. thought the best solution for separation at Churchill and at 
Meadow and Charleston was a viaduct.  
3. 
Andy Z. expressed strong opposition to acquisition of residential 
properties as part of the underpass solution for Meadow Drive and 
Charleston Road. He believed the hybrid solution was the only viable 
option and hoped the Council would reject the underpass solution for 
Meadow and Charleston.  
4. 
Richard J. (Zoom) felt grade separation should focus on moving 
traffic, not families or property lines. He asked the Council to reject 
the Charleston underpass.  
5. 
Jordan F. (Zoom) believed any plan with eminent domain was not a 
solution and fair market value sales price will not compensate for the 
economic, social, and emotional losses impacted families would face. 
She asked Council to eliminate the underpass option and endorse the 
hybrid option.  
6. 
Aram J. (Zoom) pointed out that council members need to imagine 
their own properties were being taken.  
7. 
Ethan Z. (Zoom) expressed opposition of acquisition of residential 
properties with regard to grade separation.  
8. 
Nico V. (Zoom) explained how the underpass option complicates 
traffic, increasing throughput at the sites of the grade separation at 
the expense of those traveling in any other direction and leaving 
cyclists as an afterthought.  
9. 
Tara S. (Zoom) expressed strong support for the hybrid option for 
grade separation on Charleston and Meadow and urged the Council to 
completely abandon the underpass option.  
10. Penny 
E. 
(Zoom) 
felt 
the 
design 
work 
for 
the 
Midtown 
bicycle/pedestrian-dedicated rail crossing should be prioritized over 
everything else. She noted the Churchill closure would necessitate 
construction of an alternative bike/pedestrian crossing prior to the 
start of construction work and preferred Seale for that.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
11. Charlotte (Zoom) thought the underpass was not a practical or safe 
idea for pedestrians or cyclists. She supported the hybrid model.  
12. Alan W. (Zoom) stated PABAC adopted a resolution preferring the 
hybrid and did not recommend the underpass.  
13. Karen C. (Zoom) urged the Council to reject the underpass on 
Charleston and Meadow and proceed with the hybrid option.  
14. Tom M. (Zoom) spoke in favor of the viaduct and listed its 
advantages. 
15. Linda (Zoom) stated based on the current housing market price, full 
acquisition of only two properties in Palo Alto will cost much more 
than $2M and felt the City should not waste taxpayers' money on the 
underpass.  
16. Eric N. (Zoom) hoped the Council would support the hybrid option for 
the Meadow-Charleston crossing.  
17. Karen K. (Zoom) was in favor of the hybrid solution as compared to 
the underpass for Meadow and Charleston.  
Council Member Kou believed it would be a travesty for people to lose their 
homes with the underpass option. She also explained the property effects 
from the viaduct option. She liked the hybrid option but noted it does not 
solve Churchill Avenue's grade separation. The other option is a closure, and 
the grade separation is about connecting Palo Alto.  
Vice Mayor Lauing explained the decision tonight is whether Council wants to 
follow the Rail Committee's recommendation to take the underpass and 
hybrid alternatives to preliminary engineering. This is not a decision on any 
alternative but to get more information to make an informed decision in the 
future. He added Council has not endorsed any alternative at this point and 
therefore has not approved any property takings. It is still at a very early 
conceptual stage.  
Council Member Tanaka thought the idea of taking someone's house should 
not be on the table and should not be studied or funded more. He stated it 
was a cloud over homeowners' heads and causing a lot of stress.  
Council Member Veenker asked if it was possible to elevate portions of the 
hybrid option on pylons and assumed it would be more expensive. She 
discussed the bike-ped tunnel to be created during construction, which 
would be there afterward. She felt the underpass was a question of whether 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
the drawbacks were significant enough to forego even getting more 
information but also wondered if the remaining 95 percent of engineering 
would possibly get further away from property takings.  
Peter DeStefano, Consultant, noted the pylon option was possible but would 
come with greater expense. He stated they could present different options 
with different costs in the next phase.  
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, explained that a bike and ped 
crossing would be maintained at one of the two locations at minimum during 
construction. He believed Council Member Veenker was referring to the 
additional bike and ped crossings, which would be built as a permanent 
solution. 
Council Member Burt explained design elements that could optimize the 
design and lead to reduced property impacts. The point of going forward 
with the next phase of engineering is to problem solve. If those problems 
cannot be reduced, he would be less supportive of considering the 
underpass, but he felt the only way to lift the cloud was to proceed with 
refining the design and mitigating the impacts. Right now these are worst-
case scenarios. He explained that in the case of the hybrid, because of 
Caltrain requirements, the berm, roughly a 15-foot wall, plus the train on 
top of that, would be right up against the back fences of the homes on Park. 
While it would not require any property acquisitions, it would have property 
impacts. Having that berm wall as a physical separation visually separating 
the two halves of the City is also a big deal. He described that that tunnel 
and trench options are too expensive but also require property impacts with 
support systems under the backyards of Park homes. He felt there would 
never be an ideal alternative, but in moving forward with engineering, the 
intention was to reduce the impacts, refine these alternatives, and then 
make a decision. He supported moving forward with engineering on both the 
underpass and the hybrid.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims stated she was in the minority that felt 
viaduct was the way to permanently separate the train but admitted it was 
no longer a viable option. She was worried about the traffic impacts of years 
of construction. She thought the renderings did not show enough detail 
regarding bikes and peds for the hybrid option. She was concerned about 
people losing their homes in Palo Alto and felt this should be prioritized as a 
higher concern. She wondered how the decision was made to go counter to 
XCAP's recommendation for closure at Churchill.  
Mr. DeStefano explained the initial renderings for the underpass were very 
confusing regarding the pedestrians and bicyclists, so they showed the path 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
in a different color.  That was not done for the hybrid as it was felt to be 
more self evident.   
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi explained that quite a few members of 
the public spoke against the Churchill closure. Members of the community 
from Southgate expressed concern over being shut out, and PAUSD was 
strongly opposed to it.  
Mayor Stone was curious about a single lane on the roundabout. He was 
leaning toward advancing both options to get to 15 percent to determine if 
the significant taking impacts and other concerns like the inadequate bike 
boulevard could be improved.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi responded that the one-lane roundabout 
was considered to be unsafe because of the distance for the merge to occur. 
Trisha 
Dudala, 
Hexagon 
Transportation 
Consultants, 
explained 
the 
simulation analysis for the one-lane roundabout showed there would be 
significant queues backing up onto Alma and resulting in unacceptable levels 
of service at those intersections. There also was not enough distance for the 
two lanes to merge into one lane in order to feed into the one-lane 
roundabout.  
Council Member Kou believed people will not be made whole when their 
homes are taken. There is no documentation that property taxes will 
transfer, and people on social services could potentially lose services, such 
as children receiving school lunches, if they have an increase in income. She 
noted the $14M to be procured from VTA was from a sale tax and was 
therefore taxpayers' money. She wanted to see the hybrid and trench 
alternatives advanced. 
Council Member Veenker wanted to see both the hybrid berm and hybrid 
with column go to engineering.  
MOTION: Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Burt, to 
advance the hybrid (including a mixed wall/column approach) and underpass 
alternatives for Meadow Drive and Charleston Road into the preliminary 
engineering and environmental documentation phase. 
There was discussion on the scope of the next phase of engineering.  
Council Member Kou expressed strong opposition to any property takings.   
SUBSTITUTE MOTION: Council Member Kou, seconded by Council Member 
Tanaka, to advance the hybrid and trench alternatives for Meadow Drive and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 25 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/18/2024 
Charleston Road into the preliminary engineering and environmental 
documentation phase. 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED: 2-5, Lauing, Veenker, Burt, Lythcott-
Haims, Stone no 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims, noting that underpass has some takings in 
the worst-case scenario and hybrid does not, asked what the best-case 
scenario might be. She was interested to explore the two hybrid options.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi explained it would need more study but 
suggested the best-case scenario would probably not be a complete 
elimination of all property impacts without significant changes.  
There was discussion about the wording of the motion and possibility of 
splitting the motion.  
Council Member Veenker felt looking at all options was good in terms of 
being responsible to all residents but noted she would not be interested in 
something that comes back similar to the current design. She hoped the 
engineers would come up with an improved design. She questioned how long 
this will take.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi answered that the grant agreement is 
currently through 2027 for preliminary engineering and environmental 
documentation phase, which is 35 percent.  The timing of the first half of 
that for the 15 percent depending on how long it takes to get out to bid. 
Mayor Stone asked if Staff could come back to Council with an update before 
the full 15 percent for each plan with options to change course and refocus 
on one option if desired. 
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi stated Staff would check in any time 
there was updated information about property impacts.  
MOTION PASSED: 4-3, Kou, Lythcott-Haims, Tanaka 
Mayor Stone adjourned the meeting in honor of Willie Mays, who passed 
away peacefully this afternoon in Palo Alto.  
ADJOURNMENT: The meeting was adjourned at 10:41 P.M. 
