CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 15 
 Special Meeting 
Transportation Workshop 
 
April 29, 2024 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, 
Veenker 
Present Remotely:  
Absent: 
 
Call to Order 
Mayor Stone called the meeting to order, and roll was taken.  
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, stated there were no agenda changes. He also 
noted this was a Special Meeting of the Council specifically on transportation, 
with no City Manager comments and no public comments.  
 
TRANSPORTATION WORKSHOP: STUDY SESSIONS 
1. 
Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation Plan (BPTP) Update: Review and 
discuss the vision statement, objectives, performance measures, and 
share and obtain feedback on the existing conditions technical 
analysis. 
Amanda Leahy, Kittelson & Associates, Consultant, reviewed the meeting 
purpose and agenda. She discussed findings of the analysis. Bicycle Level of 
Traffic Stress (LTS) is a rating indicating the stress a road signal or crossing 
imposes on bicyclists with level 1 indicating a low-stress facility and 4 
indicating a high-stress facility. Lower-stress facilities are separated or off-
road paths that are often wider. She presented a map showing the level of 
stress on city streets, with 68% of streets in Palo Alto determined to be LTS 
1 or 2 but often disconnected by the higher-stress roadways and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
intersections. Analysis of major barriers examined freeways, creeks, rail 
lines, and areas that need transit. The results of this analysis inform the 
locations and types of treatments needed to create more direct connections. 
For example, the lack of crossing opportunities at US 101 results in trips that 
are almost 4 times longer than the straight line crossing. She presented a 
graph of the 10-year collision history, showing a decreasing number of 
pedestrian and bicycle collisions, with further detail on the 5-year collision 
history, with a concentration in downtown and near higher-activity centers, 
including schools. She presented a map showing concentrations of fatal and 
severe-injury collisions and discussed the demographics of walking and 
biking activity.  
Ms. Leahy described the community engagement thus far and showed the 
revised draft vision statement as well as the draft objectives. The draft 
objectives are grouped into five topics: safe and inclusive, connected and 
accessible, comfortable and enjoyable, community-led, and integrated and 
collaborative. Draft performance measures will be used to help identify and 
select projects as well as track the impact of investments over time to 
evaluate how the City is meeting goals related to biking and walking. The 
selection of these measures is a key step in the development of the plan and 
network recommendations. She reviewed the next steps and recommended 
action.  
Council Member Burt noted the draft objectives were different from the prior 
objectives. He was surprised that GHGs and atmospheric pollutants as well 
as community health were not included. He did not see references to the 
benefits of parking demand reduction and traffic reduction in the objectives. 
He felt the attention spent on bikes and peds also benefits drivers who then 
have to park and that it should be framed that way. He asked if there was 
an opportunity for the council members to sit down with the consultants for 
further discussion.  
Ozzy Arce, Senior Transportation Planner, explained that Reduce Emissions 
was one of the draft performance measures and that the City's existing 
S/CAP addresses GHG emissions.  
Council Member Veenker felt it would be helpful to connect collision 
information on whether the incidents occurred at night/in the dark. She was 
interested in more specifically including climate and GHG goals in the 
objectives and vision statement, for example using wording that encourages 
walking and biking. She also felt education was missing from the objectives. 
She questioned where a road with bollards would fit into the Level of Traffic 
Stress analysis.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
Ms. Leahy responded that bollards reduce the level of stress and a separated 
bike lane would generally be an LTS 1 facility.  
Vice Mayor Lauing asked if the data that darkness was causing collisions 
suggested the City should be more significantly investing in lighting and 
whether that was a bigger cost element than expected. He was interested in 
more current studies on bike user behavior as E-bikes are becoming more 
common. He noted the map data did not seem to include anything west of 
280 and wondered if that area was included in the injury rates.  
Ms. Leahy answered that the need for lighting was very important and 
agreed that it was a bigger cost element. She stated rider count information 
will be collected and incorporated into the plan, including the types of bikes 
people are using as a data point. She explained the analysis included all of 
the street network within the city limits.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims echoed the importance of everyone 
embracing the objectives and commitments, not just the fervent cyclists and 
pedestrians. This is in everyone's interest in the move toward combatting 
climate change and being a healthier community. She felt it was time to 
make the issue mainstream. She questioned the process of assessing the 
LTS, whether it was plugging in numbers and determining a score or if 
counters were set up to really understand the actual traffic. She suggested 
discussing with neighborhood associations which streets residents avoid due 
to school traffic as a meaningful way to understand local issues.  
Ms. Leahy responded that the map shows the quantitative data analysis 
using roadway characteristics and average daily traffic volumes that obscure 
higher-stress peak periods and Staff are working to supplement that with 
community input.  
Council Member Kou agreed with involving neighborhood leaders who know 
the streets to provide important information. She felt in addition to more 
light, there needed to be education to inform people to wear reflective vests 
and have lights on bicycles. She questioned if the collision information was 
available on how the collision happened to understand the behaviors and 
help with education. Regarding the draft objectives of "comfortable and 
enjoyable," she believed it was not enjoyable for pedestrians to have cyclists 
come up behind them yelling to move. She stated the speed limit needed to 
be reconsidered.  
Ms. Leahy noted the collision data was somewhat limited as it was taken 
through police reports and what the officer reporting on the scene observed 
or understood.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
Council Member Tanaka believed the biggest thing keeping people from 
biking was safety. He described an initiative in Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
that every street has a protected bike lane by default unless it cannot and 
would love to see something like that in Palo Alto. He also suggested having 
fixed dollar amount subsidies for more affordable E-bikes rather than only 
very expensive ones, in order to be more conscious of socioeconomic 
differences of people in the City. He asked why bike shares have not 
happened even after a unanimous Council approval. He also questioned how 
El Camino fits into this.  
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, responded that there is a position 
available for someone to manage the bike share program that Staff is trying 
to hire for. There was a previous attempt to hire for that position, which was 
unsuccessful. He also noted that the El Camino work is under the Caltrans El 
Camino Ad Hoc and is not waiting for the bike plan. 
Mayor Stone was also interested in the bike sharing program. He questioned 
if there was adequate bike parking available. On the collision data, he asked 
what is considered a severe injury. He also questioned if the decrease in 
collisions was a trend across other cities.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi stated that in downtown, there seemed 
to be adequate bike parking facilities currently, and there will be more 
analysis to see if there are areas that could use additional bike parking. He 
believed the decrease in collisions was due to a confluence infrastructure 
improvements, decrease in traffic during COVID, and various other factors.  
Ms. Leahy answered that the injury classifications were from the police 
reports and a severe injury was something that might result in a hospital 
visit.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims related her son's experience in which a 
driver opened a car door and her son biked into it and tumbled over. Since 
he was not injured, there was nothing reported. She believed the data was 
only the tip of the iceberg and that there must be many more incidents like 
that. She wondered if there was a way to notify someone of the data without 
an official report.  
Council Member Kou was interested in what type of measures, such as 
helmets, might be implemented for more safety. She questioned if the notes 
from meetings with the Parks and Rec Commission and Planning and 
Transportation Commission were available, with more comments and detail 
than just the common themes.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi responded that the review of comments 
and feedback from the Pedestrian and Bicycle Advisory Committee will be 
included in the report. He believed the Planning and Transportation 
Commission did meeting minutes.  
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
1. 
Lucy L. wanted the City to rethink and engage with the school district. 
She felt making Churchill an underpass and forcing students to travel 
five blocks to get back to the school would increase bike traffic on 
Embarcadero Road where there is no bike path or protected bike lane. 
She suggested Churchill should be fully open to pedestrians and cars 
the way Charleston and East Meadow are. 
2. 
Elizabeth A. explained that making streets safe for people to walk and 
bike actually makes them safe for people to drive as well. She 
suggested looking at specific origin-destination pairs to evaluate the 
travel times currently and how it would change if the network was 
changed in some way, also adding in the concept of the 15-minute 
city. 
3. 
Liz G. (Zoom) spoke about the recent deadly accident of a bicyclist 
traveling west on California to cross El Camino Real and asked to 
include this intersection in these talks. She stated the report had a 
lack of perspective of pedestrians and cyclists dealing with truck 
traffic, noting the lack of oversight toward trucks traveling on roads 
that do not allow trucks.  
4. 
Mark S. (Zoom) would like to see the next phase of the plan focus on 
how the City will promote more biking and walking. He thought the 
reports finding that accidents are going down was a reporting problem 
and not reality. He noted the ride from Santa Clara to Palo Alto was 18 
miles on existing bike paths but only 8 miles back on El Camino and 
those distances matter to daily commuters. He wanted to see more 
attention paid to E-bikes and infrastructure in the plan and felt the 
intersection at North California and Alma next to the pedestrian bike 
tunnel needed to be looked at from a safety perspective.  
5. 
Aram J. (Zoom) requested information on the cost to the City of this 
consulting firm. He also wanted information on the cost of all lawsuits 
filed against the City of Palo Alto over the past five years for bicycle-
pedestrian accidents, including accidents in the park lands.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
6. 
Eric N. (Zoom) suggested to consider, when prioritizing projects, how 
much improvement the project provides because the amount of money 
is almost always limited.  
7. 
William C. suggested putting in speed bumps on Georgia Avenue 
adjacent to where the bicycle path meets the road in both directions as 
a simple way to slow cars down and reduce accidents. He stated he 
sees kids getting hit by cars on their bikes nearly every week and the 
incidents are almost never reported.  
8. 
Penny E. felt the collision data would be more useful if it included trip 
counts or collision rates rather than collision counts given there were 
no school trips on the road during the pandemic. She noted an error in 
the report, stating that Wilke Bridge was not a walkway but a bicycle-
pedestrian bridge carrying hundreds of bicycles every day. She spoke 
about the difficulty of biking on San Antonio Road.  
NO ACTION 
The Council took a five-minute break.  
 
2. 
Review of Rail Grade Separation Alternatives for the advancement of 
the alternatives into the preliminary engineering and environmental 
documentation phase; CEQA status – statutorily exempt under CEQA 
section 15262 (feasibility and planning study). 
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, explained that the purpose of this 
Item was to review and discuss the efforts that have been completed to date 
concerning grade separation alternatives for Churchill, Meadow, and 
Charleston. The input will inform the Rail Committee and Council's 
consideration and decision on advancing specific alternatives into the 
preliminary engineering and environmental documentation phase.  
Ripon Bhatia, Senior Engineer, described that for the Churchill Avenue 
crossing, a partial underpass was already selected as the local preferred 
alternative and for Meadow/Charleston, Council has narrowed down the 
alternatives to three options. He discussed engagement with Caltrain and 
evaluation of four-tracking segments. Caltrain has selected California Avenue 
Station for the four-tracking between Churchill Avenue and Meadow Drive. 
Caltrain provided additional technical review and reviewed all conceptual 
alternatives for these three grade crossings, identifying their concerns. Staff 
has worked with Caltrain to accommodate and address those elements in the 
alternatives. The partial underpass alternatives were refined to incorporate 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
feedback from stakeholders. Council had directed Staff to review the merits 
of Kellogg and Seale Avenue crossings as part of the partial underpass at 
Churchill Avenue. The analysis found that a bicycle and pedestrian crossing 
at Seale Avenue would fill a longer gap between alternative locations and 
would increase connectivity; however, it would also involve the use of park 
land at Peers Park. There are right-of-way constraints on the west side of 
the railroad tracks and potential impacts to the Palo Alto Unified School 
District stadium for the Kellogg Avenue location, and a drawback of the 
location is several turns cyclists and pedestrians need to make to traverse 
the crossing.  
Robert Barnard, Caltrain Chief, Rail Design and Construction, explained 
Caltrain seeks to balance the needs of an operating railroad with the 
community. The team hoped to provide additional information to support 
effective decision-making to advance this project to the next level. Caltrain's 
focused review was on the right of way in the categories of safety, 
engineering, maintenance and operations, and policy and agreements. The 
team developed draft solutions based on the available planning level 
information. Mr. Barnard provided a high-level summary of the team's 
findings. For Churchill, it was found that a partial underpass at Kellogg was 
viable, with some refinements; the closure option with mitigations was 
moderately viable with modest encroachment and a ramp impacting Alma 
Street; and closure option 2 with mitigations was viable with no concerns.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi discussed that the Rail Committee 
recommendations were to select Seale as the preferred bicycle and 
pedestrian crossing location and reconfirm the preference for a partial 
underpass for Churchill Avenue.  
Council Member Burt shared that the Rail Committee had a lot of discussion 
on Churchill versus Seale and felt the Kellogg location was not viable. He 
explained the reasons for this, including the Kellogg location's impacts to 
PAUSD. The landing for the Seale option comes up in Peers Park and opens 
up the park for bike and ped access.  
 
Council Member Veenker noted she supported the selection of Seale for the 
reasons Council Member Burt stated.  
Mayor Stone wanted to clarify that no park land was required to be 
undedicated for this option. He asked how many trips are made daily to Paly 
using the current Churchill crossing. He stated he supported both of the 
plans.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, explained that traditionally bike and ped paths 
within parks have been approved through a park improvement ordinance as 
they are park features that improve access. She did not believe there was an 
undedication requirement but that would be revisited further as an actual 
project is identified.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi later noted that bike and ped trip counts 
April 2023 showed 500 to 600 bicyclists and 870 or so pedestrians on 
Churchill daily, total, in both directions.  
Council Member Burt discussed technologies available to show origin and 
destination information. He noted that Seale is the only street that goes all 
the way from Alma to Newell, creating a potentially valuable bike route out 
to Newell. As Caltrain came back with feedback on the initial 5% designs, 
there were a number of surprises on Caltrain's feedback that made the 
grade crossings more problematic and expensive than expected. A number 
of those have been resolved and some will be worked through in the next 
phase up to 15% engineering, such as improving bike and ped circulation 
and minimizing property impacts.  
Vice Mayor Lauing pointed out there were a lot of meetings with Staff, 
Caltrain, and consultants to work out these issues, and he was pleased with 
where things were compared to where it started.  
PUBLIC COMMENT: Study Session – Item 2: Churchill Avenue & Kellogg Vs 
Seale Avenue  
1. 
Lucy L. strongly suggested, instead of building a wall, stopping all 
traffic from going across Alma. She requested the use of engineering 
skills to come up with a way to have the full underpass with the 
pedestrian and bicycle crossing at Churchill instead of spending more 
money to build a new tunnel at Seale that would not get used 
anywhere near as much.  
2. 
Kat J-M (Zoom) asked that removing the 10-foot landscaping strip be 
reconsidered as it will create a safety issue for residents backing out 
of driveways onto Alma.  
3. 
Liz G. (Zoom) was happy to see the alternative being narrowed down 
to a decision. She was grateful for Mr. Barnard's presentation. She 
was on the fence about the Churchill partial underpass and did not 
think blocking direct access to pedestrians and bicyclists would solve 
many problems and may create more challenges.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
4. 
Eric N. (Zoom) felt that if low-stress crossing options during 
construction were not available for students and commuters, many 
bicyclists 
and 
pedestrians 
may 
choose 
to 
drive, 
worsening 
congestion. He stated it was important to build new bike-ped 
crossings before the existing crossings become construction zones.  
5. 
Penny E. hoped Staff would help organize all of the information with 
a matrix. She also thought the cost estimates looked extremely out 
of date and wanted to understand the effects on the budget.  
6. 
Deborah G. (Zoom) stated she did not see any crossings in South 
Palo Alto. She noted the crossing at Seale would destroy the dog 
park at Peers Park and there would be a need for another centrally 
located dog park. She felt it was optimistic that students would go 
through Seale and that they needed the Kellogg undercrossing.  
7. 
Cedric (Zoom) echoed Penny's comment that the information was 
hard to find, in particular the information on property impacts of each 
option. He also supported building the bike-ped crossings before 
turning the existing crossings into construction zones.  
Council Member Burt explained the partial underpass design for Churchill 
itself has not changed considerably from five years ago but previously when 
a full undercrossing was being considered, there were far more property 
impacts on Churchill and Alma. The minimal impact on properties was one of 
the reasons the partial underpass was selected along with the traffic studies 
showing the primary turning movements of cars being met with this option. 
The Rail Committee fully embraces bike and ped crossings being created 
prior to the vehicular ones, with a particular emphasis on the proposed 
crossing in the vicinity of Loma Verde.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi presented maps showing the property 
impacts for the Kellogg and Seale alternatives, with the crossing at Kellogg 
requiring more partial acquisitions.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked if there was a slide showing the 
comparative property acquisitions for the full underpass alternative. 
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi noted there was no slide available for the 
full underpass but there was high-level work done on that.  
Nadia Naik explained that the property impacts would have been incredibly 
significant with the full underpass, cutting off not just the access to the 
homes along the road but the set back homes as well. Additionally, the 
traffic studies showed the main use of Alma at the Churchill intersection was 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
cars turning north and south onto Alma. She gave more detail on the bike-
pedestrian patterns.  
Council Member Kou asked where the bicyclists and pedestrians cross on the 
north side of Churchill. She also asked for confirmation on the removal of 
the 10-foot planting strip mentioned in public comment.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi responded that bikes and pedestrians 
would either cross at Embarcadero or, if selected as the preferred location, 
Seale. He also noted that a vehicular cyclist could actually navigate through 
the underpass, which would be a high level of stress.  
Senior Engineer Ripon Bhatia responded that Rail Committee proposed a 
buffer zone of 5 feet for landscaping and another 5 feet for the sidewalk, 
providing 10 feet of buffer between the curb and driveway, but that requires 
a partial acquisition from all those properties.  
The discussion continued on to Meadow and Charleston. 
Senior Engineer Ripon Bhatia explained that feedback was taken from 
various stakeholders and incorporated into the refined partial underpass 
designs for Meadow and Charleston. There were community requests to 
review the viaduct alternative. Caltrain reviewed the viaduct and shared 
their results and recommendations on improvements that would be needed. 
The Rail Committee preferred the hybrid and underpass alternatives, and 
viaduct was no longer in consideration by the Rail Committee.  
Mr. Barnard explained there is a jog in the right-of-way at Meadow Drive 
that is material to where the tracks are and influences where other things 
are located. Caltrain found the hybrid solution was viable with some 
refinements. The temporary shoofly would impact Alma and take about a 12-
foot travel lane during construction but still leave 4 travel lanes available. 
The viaduct option would push out into Alma Street, taking about two travel 
lanes for not only the viaduct but also the viaduct approach structures, 
which would be permanently in Alma Street. The underpass was found to be 
viable with modest accommodations.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi presented the property impacts for the 
Meadow Drive underpass alternative and the Charleston Road underpass 
alternative on the east and west sides, which include some tentative full 
property acquisitions. He reviewed the Rail Committee recommendation, a 
2-to-1 vote for the underpass alternative and hybrid alternative at Meadow 
Drive and Charleston Road as the preferred options to be advanced to the 
City Council for preliminary engineering review. The Rail Committee also 
recommended seeking ways to reduce property impacts; to optimize the 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
bike and pedestrian crossings and, where feasible, improve connection to 
bike infrastructure beyond the study to improve the network; to further 
refine the traffic circle on Charleston Road to reduce property impacts; and 
to refine construction impacts to better understand mutations needed during 
the lengthy construction process.  
Council Member Burt explained that based on big transportation projects in 
the region, it was assumed the costs would be at least 50% higher, but that 
will not be known until the next phase of engineering. Previously the 
consultants did not have an indication that jack box construction, which 
greatly reduces the time of construction and potentially has significant cost 
decreases, would be permitted, but Caltrain's Corridor Crossing Strategy 
now embraces jack box construction where applicable. Regarding the need 
for grade separations, he noted that even with commuter trips reduced and 
gate downtimes not as much as expected, increasing housing means there 
will likely be a lot more people in the community embracing transit and 
biking. Safety and security of the tracks is a big issue in the community, and 
grade separations can do a great deal for that. He also asked Staff to review 
the reason this item is at a decision point at this meeting. 
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi explained the City has been awarded 2 
grants for close to $8M per location and needs to enter a funding agreement 
for the next phase, which requires the preferred alternatives to be selected.  
Council Member Burt added for context that future funding is also in 
jeopardy if the preferred alternatives are not chosen by June.  
Council Member Kou, regarding the trench option being cost prohibitive, felt 
this was an investment that would last many years. She thought High-Speed 
Rail should make a determination now about whether it will come through 
here and believed money from High-Speed Rail should be invested into this 
project. She was against any option that required full property acquisitions. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed with Council Member Kou that the trench 
deserved a closer look. He also felt there would be litigation involved with 
property acquisitions that would be very expensive and take a lot of time, so 
factoring that in, he wanted to look at the trench as a viable option.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked Staff to explain how the turning 
movements would change with the roundabout in the Charleston Road 
underpass alternative and the U-turn at Alma Village on the Meadow 
alternative, which would require a traffic light and would potentially back up 
Alma. She asked about the impact at commute time.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi explained that because Charleston is 
depressed in an underpass going under the rail, the turning movements 
would not be available for somebody to make a left turn onto Charleston. To 
make that movement, one would need to go the right on Charleston and use 
the traffic circle.  
Senior Engineer Bhatia added that the three movements affected by this 
underpass were southbound right, northbound left, and eastbound left 
because of the bike and ped path on the north side on a different elevation 
than the roadway. Since the movements cannot be made at the intersection, 
one will have to go through the roundabout. He explained a similar issue on 
Meadow. The south side is utilized for bike and ped pathway to minimize 
impact to the residential driveways. The difference in grades does not allow 
any movements that go toward the south side on Alma Street at that 
location. The northbound right would have to use Alma Village to make a U-
turn and then go onto the off ramp in the southbound direction to go onto 
Meadow Drive. Eastbound Meadow Drive traffic will not be able to access 
northbound Alma and would have to use a different street to get to Alma 
Street. He noted the traffic study took those turning movements and signal 
timing into account, and off ramps were looked at to allow for the additional 
turning movements.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims noted she was the Rail Committee member 
who voted against this. She believed most members of the community did 
not know this would be a lengthy construction project with a lot of backups 
and delays, fundamentally altering traffic patterns. She was interested in 
making the least impact on private property and the character of the City. 
She accepted none of the options would please everybody but hoped to end 
up with an option that felt visionary and in service to what is right decades 
out, not just today.  
Council Member Veenker stated there were no perfect solutions and this was 
very hard. She noted there was a lot to like about the hybrid option and 
asked if it was possible to ballpark the cost of having it built on stanchions 
like a viaduct.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi stated the option for stanchions could be 
evaluated further if the hybrid option was selected.  
Vice Mayor Lauing noted the one thing worse than all the alternatives was no 
project. He explained that the Rail Committee had listed for further 
consideration 
to 
reduce 
property 
impacts, 
optimize 
bike-pedestrian 
crossings, and further refine the traffic circle on Charleston, hoping there are 
solutions to these with further engineering. He discussed the reconsideration 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
of the viaduct by the Rail Committee and the costs of the trench option, 
originally estimated at $800M to $950M and currently estimated to be 50% 
more. He did not want to open the trench as an option relative to funding 
and the other alternatives.  
Council Member Kou felt there should be a line item included for the cost of 
property acquisitions and potential related lawsuits.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi clarified that the line item for right-of-
way and utilities was meant to capture those costs.  
Council Member Burt added some context to the discussion regarding the 
trench option. For a viaduct or underpass, it did not impact the cost that 
someday Caltrain may need to put four tracks there. However, it is not 
possible to build a two-track trench and come back and do a four-track 
trench. Allowing for the four-track would cause costs to go up by 50% or 
more, plus significant increased cost from a design standpoint, meaning the 
trench would unlikely be less than $1.5B. The funding sources will not pay 
for the difference in cost between that and other alternatives. It is not 
possible to come up with another $1B. There is an impact to community 
quality of life in not doing anything or continuing to look for an ideal solution 
regardless of price when the dollars are not available. He noted it was 
possible to choose an option and a backup, though there would be additional 
cost involved. He also discussed how the traffic is impacted by all of the 
options. The traffic studies show that the hybrid, viaduct, or even trench had 
traffic signals at Alma backed up and the only option that significantly 
improves the traffic is the underpass.  
Council Member Burt added that one of the main reasons people were 
advocates for the viaduct was the idea of a having a linear park, but 
unfortunately Caltrain must retain the surface rail even with the viaduct and 
there is no option for a linear park. He discussed that this type of 
transportation project almost invariably has property impacts. He felt there 
should be a presentation about those impacts to the full Council prior to 
coming back with this in June.  
Mayor Stone asked why the viaduct is so much more expensive than the 
hybrid option. He then stated he agreed with the Rail Committee 
recommendations to advance the two preferred alternatives.  
Peter DeStefano, Senior Transportation Engineer at AECOM, responded that 
most of the cost is coming from the structure itself. A lot of the cost is below 
ground in the columns and foundations.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
PUBLIC COMMENT: Study Session – Item 2: Meadow Drive & Charleston 
Road  
1. 
Steve E. believed this project was a big deal and worth spending the 
time to get it right. He noted his preferred option was the viaduct but 
asked to at least make the hybrid have no dirt berms.  
2. 
Elizabeth A. stated she was the person who brought forth the 
underpass and was willing to spend time explaining why they work. 
She explained that the necessity of every requirement must be 
questioned and that the definition of the project is critical. She also 
felt the process needed to include more than just engineers.  
3. 
Ron P. felt that in addition to the negative impacts to properties, the 
underpass was still a flawed solution with convoluted traffic patterns. 
He stated there was a lot of discussion about the underpass but not 
much about the hybrid and hoped that did not reflect the thinking.  
4. 
Aram J. (Zoom) wanted to know the cost of all consultants hired by 
the City to give information on the grade separations.  
5. 
Michael 
W. 
(Zoom) 
was 
concerned 
around 
the 
Charleston 
roundabout. He suggested moving bike and ped traffic exclusively to 
East Meadow if the current plan prevents certain Charleston/Alma 
turn patterns. He felt the inconvenience of homeowners of other 
residential roads could not supersede the impacts to the residents on 
Charleston by the traffic circle.  
6. 
Linda (Zoom), owner of a property on Charleston Road, asked the 
City to consider any other options that will not take away residents' 
properties.  
7. 
David N. (Zoom) agreed with Linda and shared the story of his 
mother who is a resident of Charleston Road and does not want to 
lose her home. 
8. 
Eric N. (Zoom) asked the Council to consider the hybrid plan as it has 
minimal acquisitions of property and is four times cheaper than the 
trench.  
9. 
Patrice B. (Zoom), a resident of Charleston, felt that property 
acquisition was a robbery and not a negotiation. She listed the 
Council's priorities, including belonging, stating those residents wish 
to belong and not be forced out. She urged the Council to figure out 
how to move the traffic and keep the families.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 04/29/2024 
10. Liz G. (Zoom) supported this decision and urged the Council to go 
forward and take advantage of the grant money available.  
11. Michael B. (Zoom) believed this should go into a public vote and not 
be decided by City Council. He stated people will not be using cars 
the same way in 30 years from now and felt that people living in Palo 
Alto should come first.  
12. Bryan C. (Zoom) encouraged looking at alternatives that mitigate the 
noise and vibrations caused by the trains, which will directly improve 
everyone's daily life.  
13. Lu L. (Zoom), a resident of Charleston, asked the City to look at the 
viaduct option again considering it takes the shortest amount of time, 
was not nearly as expensive as other options, and had less property 
effects.  
14. Cedric (Zoom) hoped the trench would not be further considered and 
felt the viaduct was the best option for cyclists and people with 
mobility issues, also having the least vibrational impact. He noted the 
underpass had many issues for all modes plus the property takings. 
He did not believe residents on Park would support the hybrid over 
the viaduct because of design concerns.  
15. Penny E. thought there needed to be a package with renderings and 
further engineering to help the community understand the projects.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi reviewed the next steps, including 
returning to Council on June 10 for consideration of selecting preferred 
alternatives.  
Council Member Burt supported renderings to help the public visualize the 
options. He also felt it would help to have not just numbers of properties 
impacted but percentages by the underpass and hybrid and added that the 
engineering design going forward would further optimize that.  
NO ACTION 
 
ADJOURNMENT: The meeting was adjourned at 9:40 P.M. 
 
