CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 27 
 Special Meeting 
 
June 17, 2024 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 4:00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, 
Veenker 
Present Remotely:  
Absent: 
 
 
CALL TO ORDER 
Mayor Stone called the meeting to order, and the roll was called.  
 
SPECIAL ORDERS OF THE DAY 
1. 
Proclamation June 2024 as LGBTQIA+ Pride Month 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims read the proclamation of June 2024 as 
LGBTQIA+ Pride Month. 
NO ACTION 
 
2. 
Proclamations 
Recognizing 
Departing 
Boards 
and 
Commissions 
Commissioners 
Mayor Stone extended gratitude to departing Board and Commission 
members on behalf of the community. The members recognized with 
proclamations were Gogo Heinrich, Michael Makinen, Margaret Wimmer, 
Daryl Savage, Nia Taylor, David Bower, Marilyn Keller, Lisa Forsell, and 
Lauren Segal.  
NO ACTION 
 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
3. 
Review List of Applications for Historic Resources Board Vacancies and 
Provide Direction for Interviews 
Mahealani Ah Yun, City Clerk, reviewed the process for determining 
candidates to interview and displayed the vote results. Interviews are 
tentatively scheduled for August 5.  
The Council selected the following candidates to interview for the 
Historic Resources Board: 
• Barry Katz: Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, 
Veenker 
• Caroline Willis: Kou, Lauing, Stone, Veenker 
• Geddes Ulinskas: Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, 
Veenker 
• Zachary Pozner: Burt, Lythcott-Haims, Tanaka 
 
CLOSED SESSION 
4. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY‐ EXISTING LITIGATION 
Subject: Eric Figueroa, et al. v. City of Palo Alto 
Santa Clara County Superior Court Case No. 21‐CV‐383740 (One Case, 
as Defendant) 
Authority: Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(1) 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
1. Aram J. (Zoom) noted this was related to officers who filed a lawsuit 
that they felt harassed because of a Black Lives Matter mural. He 
believed this was a frivolous lawsuit and suggested not paying out on 
this case. He requested information on how much money has been 
spent on this and who the outside counsel is in the matter.  
MOTION: Council Member Lythcott-Haims moved, seconded by Mayor 
Stone, to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Tanaka absent 
Council went into Closed Session at 4:35 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:28 P.M. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
Mayor Stone announced no reportable action. 
 
AGENDA CHANGES, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, stated there were a number of changes reflected 
in the amended agenda issued last Thursday but no changes since then.  
 
PUBLIC COMMENT 
Mayor Stone reviewed new Public Comment policies. All speakers have to be 
in person, not virtual. Total speaker time is capped at 30 minutes, so if 
Public Comment goes beyond that, the rest of the comments are moved to 
the end of the agenda.  
1. 
Zafarali A. described the difficulties of finding affordable housing near 
transit, work, and leisure. He urged the Council to create abundant 
housing.  
2. 
Patty I., a resident of Channing House, discussed the urgent need for 
affordable housing, especially for the valuable workers of Channing 
House who must drive up to two hours to work.  
3. 
Rika Y. wanted more housing and access to housing for local workers, 
especially educators. There is a need for below-market rent, and the 
lack of affordable housing may cause a high turnover in educators.  
4. 
Avroh S., member of Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition (PASCC), 
thanked the City for the work on the One Margin Reach Code. He also 
spoke on behalf of Palo Alto Forward to emphasize the importance of 
availability of housing in regard to climate and youth.  
5. 
Stephen L. spoke about the economic benefits of additional housing, 
bringing people downtown and providing more customers for local 
businesses. Allowing people to live closer to their jobs can help with 
hard-to-fill vacancies.  
6. 
Elaine U. noted she helped found Palo Alto Forward ten years ago and 
that the housing crisis has actually become worse since then because 
not enough housing has been built. She stated Palo Alto can do better 
and is the ideal place for housing.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
7. 
Bob R. was in opposition to the proposed Seale Avenue tunnel 
underpass. He noted there were better alternatives and urged the 
Council to reconsider the proposal.  
8. 
Sreeja P. of Tarana Wireless asked people to join the Stars and Stripes 
Community Run on Saturday, June 29, to raise money for the Valley 
Health Foundation to support and celebrate frontline hospital workers.  
9. 
Kirti B., Martin Luther King Artist Residency Participant of 2023, 
explained that she selected housing insecurity and sense of belonging 
and inclusion and shared some of her findings from this research.  
10. 
Ben L. spoke about Gaza, asking the Council to stake out a moral 
stance on this subject.  
11. 
Gary G. felt the proposed Seale Avenue underpass was not a good 
idea as it was unnecessary, unsafe, and damages the neighborhood.  
12. 
Anja L. believed the proposed Seale Avenue pedestrian and bike tunnel 
was unlikely to make it safer for kids to get from one side of the tracks 
to the other.  
13. 
Aram J. supported previous comments about Palo Alto Forward and 
the need for housing. He also wanted a discussion about a permanent 
ceasefire. He questioned when there would be a fire truck at Station 4 
and whether there was one stationed there at the time of the fire in 
the area of Bill's Café. 
14. 
Sarit S. appreciated the new policy preventing City Council from taking 
positions on foreign affairs. She spoke about the Hamas military leader 
resisting a ceasefire.  
15. 
Lori M. noted the work to be done around safety and belonging, 
including a need for anti-Semitism education for city leadership, to 
lead by example. She described a rise in and normalization of anti-
Semitism in Palo Alto.  
16. 
Soheila M. of Ability Path stated the Council's decision to support 
Ability Path's $250K grant request was vital and urgent for the entire 
community.  
17. 
Kathleen J.-M. described disconnects in documents on the website 
talking about the comparisons of different available grade separation 
alternatives.  
 
 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
COUNCIL MEMBER QUESTIONS, COMMENTS AND ANNOUNCEMENTS 
Mayor Stone announced that he and Vice Mayor Lauing attended the 
Stanford graduation ceremony for the Class of 2024. 
 
CONSENT CALENDAR 
5. 
Adoption of Fiscal Year 2025 Investment Policy as Recommended by 
the Finance Committee 
6. 
Utilities Advisory Commission Recommends Adoption of the 2024 
Annual Water Shortage Assessment Report 
7. 
CONSENT: Approval of a Record of Land Use Action to Upgrade the 
Property Located at 411 Kipling Street From a Category 4 Resource on 
the Local Historic Inventory to a Category 2 Resource. 
8. 
CONSENT: Approval of a Record of Land Use Action to Upgrade the 
Property Located at 271 University Avenue From a Category 3 
Resource on the Local Historic Inventory to a Category 2 Resource. 
9. 
Approval of Construction Contract C24190748 with Ross Recreation 
Equipment Company Inc. in the Amount of $305,600 and Authorization 
for the City Manager or Their Designee to Negotiate and Execute 
Change Orders up to a Not‐to‐Exceed Amount of $30,600 for the 
Ramos Park Improvements, Capital Improvement Program Project 
PG‐14000; CEQA Status—Exempt Under CEQA Guidelines Section 
15301 
10. 
QUASI‐JUDICIAL. 
420 
Acacia: 
Final 
Map 
and 
Street 
Naming 
[24PLN‐00027]: Request for a Final Map to Subdivide a 35,573 Square 
Foot Parcel Having Split Zoning Designations (R‐1 and RM‐30) for 
Condominium 
Purposes 
(16 
Residential 
Units). 
Environmental 
Assessment: 
Exempt 
from 
the 
Provisions 
of 
the 
California 
Environmental Quality Act in Accordance with CEQA Guidelines Section 
15332 (In‐fill Development). 
11. 
Approval of Contract Amendment Number 1 to Contract C24189570 
with Downtown Streets Team in the Amount of $548,958 to Combine 
Contracts to Increase Operational Efficiency for a Revised Total 
Not‐to‐Exceed Amount of $1.1 Million Over Three Years; CEQA Status: 
Not a Project 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
12. 
Approval of Construction Contract Number C24190081 with Marina 
Landscape, Inc. in the Amount Not‐to‐exceed $338,459 for Dog Park 
Installation and Renovation Project PG‐18001; and Authorization of 
Contract Contingency in an Amount Not‐to‐Exceed $50,769 for Related, 
Additional but Unforeseen Work Which May Develop During the 
Project; and Amend the FY2024 Budget in the Capital Improvement 
Fund (2/3 vote required); CEQA status – categorically exempt. 
13. 
Approval of Contract Amendment Number 1 to Contract Number 
S24189598 with Good City Company in the Amount of $18,120 for a 
Stream Corridor Protection Ordinance Update; the Total not‐to‐exceed 
Amount of the Contract is $92,293. CEQA Status: Exempt Pursuant to 
CEQA Guidelines 15061(b)(3). 
14. 
Authorization for the Mayor to sign a 3‐Year Friendship Cities 
Agreement with Narok, Kenya 
15. 
Approval of a Funding Agreement with Federal Railroad Administration 
to 
Receive 
$6 
Million 
for 
the 
Preliminary 
Engineering 
and 
Environmental Documentation Phase for the Grade Separation Projects 
at Churchill Avenue, Meadow Drive, and Charleston Road crossings. 
CEQA status – statutorily exempt per CEQA section 15262; this 
funding agreement will partially fund CEQA/NEPA review of the grade 
separation projects. 
16. 
Adopt a Resolution to Allow Consumption of Alcohol under PAMC 
section 9.04.010 on California Avenue in Conjunction with the 3rd 
Thursday Event 
17. 
Approval of 1) Increase of Construction Contingency for Contract No. 
C21178123B with Swinerton Builders in the Amount of $1,000,000; 2) 
Contract Amendment No. 4 for Contract No. S20176170 with Romig 
Engineers, Inc. in the Amount of $21,786 and to Extend the Contract 
Term; 3) Increase of Contingency for Purchase Order with Pivot 
Interiors Inc. in the Amount of $23,440; and 4) Authorization for the 
City Manager to Execute a General Services Contract for Moving 
Services in an Amount of up to $250,000 for the New Public Safety 
Building Capital Project (PE‐15001); CEQA ‐ Environmental Impact 
Report for the New Public Safety Building and New California Avenue 
Area Parking Garage (Resolution No. 9772) 
18. 
Approval of Contracts with US Bank and its Wholly Owned Subsidiary 
Elavon for General Banking, Safekeeping (Custodial), and Merchant 
Services for a Period of Five Years; and Approval of Contract with 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
Wells Fargo for Lockbox Services for a Period of One Year; CEQA 
Status: Not a Project. 
19. 
Authorization for the City Manager or Designee to Negotiate and 
Execute a Line of Credit totaling $31 Million to Address Regional 
Wastewater Treatment Fund Cashflow as Recommended by the 
Finance Committee; CEQA Status – Not a Project 
20. 
Resolution to Vacate Portions of Three Public Service Easements at 
1700 Embarcadero Road 
21. 
Approval of an Extension to Building Permit 18000‐00536 for 429 
University Ave; CEQA status – Mitigated Negative Declaration 
(ENV20718). 
22. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of an Ordinance extending the Term of 
Ordinance No. 5517 by an Additional 12 Months from June 16, 2024 to 
June 30, 2025. Ordinance 5517 Amends Title 18 (Zoning) of the Palo 
Alto Municipal Code to Update Definitions, Broaden Permitted Uses and 
Provide Limits on Certain Uses through Updates to the Conditional Use 
Permit 
Thresholds. 
Environmental 
Review: 
CEQA 
Exemption 
15061(b)(3) (FIRST READING: June 3, 2024 PASSED 7‐0) 
23. 
SECOND READING: Ordinance Amending Chapter 16.14 (California 
Green Building Standards, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 
11) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code to Adopt the 2022 Green Building 
Standards Code, Along With Local Modifications Related to Electrical 
Vehicle 
Charging 
Infrastructure 
Requirements 
and 
Building 
Electrification Requirements and an Ordinance Amending Chapter 
16.17 (California Energy Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, 
Part 6) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code to Adopt the 2022 California 
Energy Code, Along with Local Modifications to Increase Energy 
Efficiency 
Standards 
for 
Buildings, 
Mandate 
Electric‐Ready 
Requirements and Incentivize All‐Electric New Construction. CEQA 
Status: 
Exempt 
under 
CEQA 
Guidelines 
Sections 
15308 
and 
15061(b)(3) (FIRST READING: June 3, 2024 PASSED 6‐1, Tanaka no 
and 7‐0) 
24. 
Adoption of a Resolution Approving an Initial Study/Mitigated Negative 
Declaration for Citywide Implementation of Fiber‐to‐the‐Premises 
Project (FTTP), Including the Mitigation, Monitoring and Reporting 
Program; Approval of Purchase Order No. 4524000496 With Thermo 
Bond Buildings in an Amount Not to Exceed of $339,076 for the 
Design, Build and Delivery of a Modular Building “Fiber Hut“; 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
Authorization for the City Manager or Their Designee to Negotiate and 
Execute Change Orders in the Amount Not‐to‐Exceed of $31,384 for 
Related Additional but Unforeseen Work That may Develop During the 
Project, for a Total Not‐to‐Exceed Amount of $370,460 with Thermo 
Bond Buildings. 
25. 
Approval of a Professional Services Contract Number C24188127 with 
Telecommunications Engineering Associates (TEA) in an Amount Not to 
Exceed $834,882 for Public Safety Radio Network Maintenance and 
Construction for a Period of Five (5) Years; CEQA Status: Not a Project 
26. 
Approval of Assignment and Assumption Agreement to transfer Baker 
Tilly US LLP’s contract to Baker Tilly Advisory Group, LP; CEQA – Not a 
Project 
27. 
Approval of: (1) Contract No. C24187724 with LensLock, Inc 
(Lenslock) for replacement of the police public contact audio/video 
system for a five (5) year term in an amount not to exceed 
$1,128,225; and (2) Police Audio/Video Technology Surveillance Use 
Policy; CEQA status – categorically exempt. Item Removed Off Agenda 
and Placed on June 18, 2024 City Council Meeting. 
AA1. Adopt an Ordinance and Resolution Extending the Interim Parklet 
Program to the Car‐ Free Portion of Ramona Street through March 
2025; CEQA status ‐ categorically exempt New Item added 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
1. Herb B. (Items 11, 12, 15, & 24) discussed that, regarding Item 11, 
municipal code requires property owners to be responsible for cleaning 
their own sidewalks. Item 12 does not mention which dog park. On 
Item 24, the City Council, as the approving authority, has to review 
and respond the comments on the initial study, which was omitted. He 
felt Item 15 was a waste of money as the main need for grade 
separation was for commuters who used to come by automobile to 
Palo Alto, which is not happening anymore.  
2. David M. (Item 15) asked the Council to consider closing Churchill to 
traffic to make safety a priority. He was concerned the Seale tunnel 
would be built before the funding is approved for the Churchill crossing 
and asked for contingencies if the funding does not go through. He 
was concerned it was a waste of money for a project that may not 
happen.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
MOTION: Council Member Lythcott-Haims moved, seconded by Vice Mayor 
Lauing, to approve Agenda Item Numbers 5-26, AA1. 
Council Member Kou requested to pull Agenda Item Number 15. 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 15. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 9, 11, 
17, 19, 23, 24. 
MOTION PASSED ITEM 15: 6-1, Kou no 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 9, 11, 17, 19, 23, 24: 6-1, Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 5-8, 10, 12-14, 16, 18, 20-22, 25, 26, AA1: 
7-0 
Council Member Kou stated the advanced grade separation alternatives show 
the taking of peoples' homes while the Council and community talk about 
housing as a human right. She felt spending $20M to study this was a waste 
of voters' money and hoped to revisit the separations and look at other 
alternatives.  
Council Member Tanaka supported the project in Item 9 but felt the staff 
report was unclear whether the amount from Ross was within budget. He 
loved the idea of Item 11 but believed the 51% cost increase was dramatic 
and also felt metrics should be done by a third party to ensure service. On 
Item 17, he stated the new jail on Cal Ave was already over budget and this 
was another increase on that amount. Regarding Item 19, his issue was that 
it was based on historical contributions of capital rather than usage. Other 
cities have grown, and he felt their obligation for the credit line should be 
higher. He stated Item 23 was consistent with his prior vote. On Item 24, he 
felt the City was too late on FTTP and would not be able to deliver it in a 
cost-effective manner.  
 
CITY MANAGER COMMENTS  
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, stated that 2023 RIPA data was now available on 
the City's website. He described upcoming summer events through the 
month of July. He discussed events in local cities honoring Juneteenth. He 
stated the last City Council meeting of the fiscal year would occur the 
following day at 4 P.M. and listed upcoming items.  
The Council took a 15-minute break at 7:21 P.M. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
 
ACTION ITEMS 
28. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of Budget Ordinance for Fiscal Year 2025, 
Including the Operating and Capital Budgets and Municipal Fee 
Schedule; Adoption of a Resolution determining the Appropriations 
Limit for Fiscal Year 2025; Acceptance of Updates to the Retiree 
Healthcare Actuarial Report; and Approval of Contributions for Retiree 
Healthcare Benefits 
Council Member Veenker recused herself from certain Stanford-
related elements of the budget, outlined in Attachment C of the 
report. 
Lauren Lai, Administrative Services Director/CFO, explained the goal to 
adopt the Operating Budget and the Capital Budget. She noted it was a 
balanced budget that sets forth a path to continue high-quality service, also 
focused on fiscal stability, continuing to be innovative in providing services, 
and organizational resilience.  
Paul Harper, Budget Manager, presented the FY 2025 Budget Summary. The 
Operating Budget is $1.1B with $307M in the General Fund and $442M for 
capital infrastructure improvements. In addition, the 5-year CIP is planned 
for about $1.5B. The Budget Stabilization Reserve is recommended to be left 
at $54.4M, which is 18.5%, the recommended level of funding. The 
Uncertainty Reserve is recommended to remain at $6.2M to help fund the 
$11M gross deficit projected for 2026. It is recommended to add 29 full-time 
FTE to the budget with 16.5 in the General Fund. This incudes 9 additional 
positions from the proposed budget: 3 firefighter positions to up-staff Fire 
Station 2, 5 positions for the Junior Museum and Zoo, and an associated 
program administrator for Sustainability and Climate Action Plan work in the 
Electric Fund. He presented the Finance Committee's recommended changes 
to the proposed budget of expenses and revenue sources for the General 
Fund.  
Budget Manager Harper described additionally an oversight recently 
discovered in funding for the HSRAP program in 2025. Staff recommends an 
additional change of $58K to be added to HSRAP and the Uncertainty 
Reserve being reduced to $6.1M. In 2025, the sources match the expenses, 
so there is no additional impact. However, ongoing, there is a gap of about 
$1.9M, part of the projected $11M estimated deficit in 2026. He reviewed 
the Finance Committee's recommendations for changes to other funds. A list 
of staff work plan items for FY 2025 was highlighted. These items do not 
necessarily need funding at this time for budget adoption, but Staff will 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
continue to work on them through 2025 and return to Finance Committee 
and/or Council with updates and recommendations for funding as needed. 
Finally, he showed the draft motion for this item.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims questioned the two line items to review an 
alternative service approach for Palo Alto Link with reduced net costs. She 
clarified that JMZ would have a net loss, with revenue of $350K and 
expenses of $509K. Regarding the impact fees for multifamily units, she 
asked if a revision in the way this was calculated was going to be revisited in 
order for smaller dwellings to be fairly assessed.  
Budget Manager Harper explained the direction was to come up with a net 
savings of $400K for this Palo Alto Link. This action increases revenue in 
2025 from Stanford in order to cover a portion of the cost and decreases 
expenses by $177K in order to get to $400K in savings. Staff was not 
confident those ongoing revenues could be sustained, so the ongoing plan is 
to reduce the expenses by $340K and increase the revenue minimally by 
$60K, netting out to the same amount of savings.  
Director Lai noted there will be a net cost to continue to provide the high-
quality service at the JMZ. She explained the impact fee item is scheduled to 
be reviewed by Finance Committee in late summer/early fall.  
Council Member Kou asked if Fire Station 2 would have water using overtime 
dollars prior to the new employees coming on. In the Citywide Special Event 
Funding consolidation, she asked if the $40K allocated for Third Thursday 
was ongoing or if the organization was expected to try to find funding to 
support those events in the future. She also why PATMA needed to increase 
to $400K to maintain current service levels.  
Geo Blackshire, Fire Chief, explained the plan is to starting staffing Engine 
62 with overtime in the beginning of the fiscal year and then without 
overtime once the vacancies are filled.  
Steve Guagliardo, Assistant to the City Manager, noted the $40K was the 
funding request received from Third Thursday for this year. There would be 
annual conversations about the level of funding.  
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, explained that last year Council 
gave the TMA additional funding that amounted to approximately $384K 
annualized, so $400K is very similar to that amount on an annualized basis. 
He also noted the demand for TMA services has risen significantly 
throughout time and there is a need to keep up with the growth and 
returned demand.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
Council Member Kou asked if there was any outreach to corporations to fund 
some of the TMA services.  
Justine Burt, TMA Executive Director, explained most of the companies 
served were small shops, restaurants, and grocery stores. Stanford Mall 
does not have a TMA plan, and that will be discussed. She also mentioned 
outreach to the small businesses along the Caltrans project to switch parking 
spaces to bike lanes as well as to Channing House.  
Council Member Tanaka noted the FY 2025 adopted budget shows revenue 
of $287M and expenses of $306M, a $19M deficit, larger than it was in the 
depth of COVID. He questioned how this could be considered a balanced 
budget. He asked about the Fire Station 2 staffing levels, whether Stanford 
helps to pay for that, and if the staffing level affects insurance rates for 
businesses and homeowners in the area.  
Director Lai noted that a balanced budget means using resources that are 
ongoing plus resources on hand.  
Budget Manager Harper agreed that the difference was $19.4M but noted 
that approximately $12.7M of that was appropriated for funding needs in 
2026. Taking that out, the actual difference is about $6.7M, and the plan is 
to use $6M from the Uncertainty Reserve and about $0.7M from the 
Development Services Reserve.  
Fire Chief Blackshire explained if the budget is adopted, Station 2 will be 
staffing a fire engine and an ambulance both full time, 24/7/365. He noted 
Stanford would pick up 19% of this budget, which offsets some of the costs 
to the City. The staffing level does not affect the insurance rates.  
Council Member Burt gave more detail that when PATMA was formed, there 
was a hope that larger businesses would be contributors but they already 
had their own TDM programs. It is small businesses and low-income workers 
using the services. He described a VTA pilot program to provide 500 
extremely discounted passes for low- and moderate-income workers at $90 
a pass instead of $1000. He explained Third Thursday had been promoted as 
an economic event but was primarily a community special event rather than 
serving the already busy businesses there. He added there were a number of 
items Finance Committee did not put into the budget but planned to revisit 
at the midyear budget update.  
PUBLIC COMMENT:  
1. Herb B. believed the municipal fee schedule should show airport fees 
for such things as tie-downs, hangar space, and covered and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
uncovered parking. He questioned if the agreement with Mountain 
View and Los Altos that whichever city has fire apparatus closest to a 
call for service would respond first depends on having Fire Station 4 
staffed with an engine. He stated there has not been an accurate 
description of allocation of cost where the FTTP program and electric 
grid share labor and recalled that fiber would have been subsidizing 
electric. He also felt the City being responsible for connecting main 
network to main homes, even if done through a contractor, would 
require a 218 hearing on any fees.  
2. Bill Ross, speaking on behalf of Ann B., Fred B., Annette R., and Ceci 
K., advocated for full fire staff funding for Station 4. He stated the City 
Manager has said on several occasions that staffing Station 4 would be 
extremely expensive but there has been no analysis that backs that 
up. The 2025 budget letter has an explanation of the funding for 
Station 2, and the same type of analysis should be done for equally 
staffing Station 4, analyzing what the Stanford and Measure K 
contributions would be. He noted the City's 201 ambulances have 
made money for 4 decades in almost every jurisdiction. He suggested 
an analysis of the costs between Insurance Service Office ratings. He 
felt the first concern in the budget should be public safety.  
3. John K. stated it was unfortunate the issue of impact fees for small 
housing in Palo Alto has not come back to Council before now. He 
suggested Council decide to suspend imposition of the impact fees for 
smaller housing until something new is decided. If not, he wanted 
Finance Committee to consider that it is not just ADUs but apartments, 
townhomes, and SB9 units and also look at how revenue has been 
raised and used over the last couple years.  
4. Nancy K. thanked Staff and Council for adding Eleanor Pardee Park as 
a priority to the bathrooms for 2025 planning and install in 2026. It is 
a desperately needed toilet for a high-usage park.  
5. Eswar S. stated he has a plot at Eleanor Pardee Park and has been 
waiting for the restroom to be installed for a long time. He urged that 
it happen sooner than later.  
6. Penny E. (Zoom) asked if the request to geofence the schools for Palo 
Alto Link during school commute times and not just school hours has 
been implemented. She felt this service encourages kids to call a car 
when they need to go somewhere, counter to what Palo Alto has been 
working on for 30 years, getting kids walking and biking to school.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
Council Member Veenker explained there are certain line items that relate to 
Stanford University, and she recused herself for that portion of Council's 
discussion.  
Council Member Kou asked if the fire services contract with Stanford was 
based on their population and renegotiated when it grows. She questioned 
whether VTA was going to give another year of funding for Palo Alto Link.  
Fire Chief Blackshire explained the contract with Stanford typically had 
ongoing adjustments based on what is adopted in the budget, but there is 
no ongoing change in calculation based on population or services.  
Ed Shikada, City Manager, believed the initial proportion of shares in the 
contract was based on number of calls. The current contract ends next year.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi noted the discussion with VTA was about 
what criteria they would allow to apply for that. In general, Palo Alto Link 
would be looking for additional funding opportunities, not just VTA. The 
dollar amount in the budget is the amount necessary for General Fund 
dollars after using the available funding from TFCA Grant, Stanford Research 
Park, and fares.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked if the Palo Alto Link funding changes 
correspond with reduction in service and whether funding was sought during 
the budget process to expand to seven days a week.  
Chief Transportation Official Kamhi noted the Palo Alto Link funding 
corresponds with a minor reduction in service, specifically geofencing schools 
during school commute times, otherwise maintaining current level of service. 
In May, efficiencies allowed expanded hours from 7 to 7. There were various 
different funding requests, but this represented a reduction back to a little 
bit lower than base levels.  
MOTION: Council Member Lythcott-Haims moved, seconded by Vice Mayor 
Lauing, to approve the Stanford-related items of the FY 2025 Budget as 
outlined in Attachment C of the Staff Report. 
MOTION PASSED: 5-1-1, Tanaka no, Veenker recused 
Council Member Kou responded to the Finance Committee's questions about 
Ability Path funds. She reviewed the services they provide for children, 
adults, and families for the intellectually disabled community. They serve 
nearly 40 preschool children, looking to serve 50, with adult IDD programs 
to help proceed to independent living and service for traumatic brain injury 
and stroke. Mitchell Park Place affordable housing will have space for a 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
computer lab, art study, and multipurpose space for programs and services, 
but they need to start now on getting the funding in order to have it 
available when Mitchell Park Place opens. The funding is urgent to prepare 
for fundraising in October to show the City has invested and believes in 
those programs to help residents. She hoped to move it up from the midyear 
review.  
Council Member Tanaka asked about the impact on the budget of lower 
impact fees for smaller units and ADUs. He suggested more people might 
build if the fees were lower. He questioned how Staff interacted with the 
Parking Assessment District members while creating the budget. He wanted 
to ensure Downtown was taken care of.  
City Manager Shikada responded that decreasing the impact fees would 
decrease the revenues for the programs funded through those fees, like 
parks, community centers, libraries, etc.  
Assistant to the City Manager Guagliardo explained he had conversations 
with various members of the former Parking Assessment District about what 
was included in the budget and what is included in the University Avenue 
Fund, which is funded by permit sales and funds cleaning and other activities 
in Downtown.  
Council Member Tanaka felt there were a lot of valuable things to fund in the 
budget but that it was draining reserves. He wished there was more fiscal 
discipline. He believed some items on the budget, like the fire and 
emergency medical response, were worthy but that the massive gas rate 
increase from 9% to 12.5%, which is 3 to 4 times the rate of inflation, was 
insensitive to those in the City who are not doing well economically. The JMZ 
ticket price from $10 to $14 was a massive increase in fees. He did not 
agree with a lot of the budget and felt the shortfall could have been 
tightened up with better procurement and saying no on consent items.  
Council Member Veenker noted that Ability Path was one of the issues the 
Finance Committee struggled with. Between now and midyear review, Staff 
is going to bring forward an item about the process for applying for city 
funds, which will in part add to the fiscal discipline Council Member Tanaka is 
looking for. The timing of that fit well with Ability Path; however, she was 
concerned about Ability Path looking for resources to launch their matching 
grant campaign. She felt $¼M was ambitious but asked if it was possible to 
do something like $100K now and have them reapply for the balance at 
midyear. Addressing the impact fees, she questioned whether it was possible 
to retroactively refund FY 2025 fees in excess of the ultimate fee schedule 
from July 1 onward once the adjustments are made.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
City Manager Shikada noted that retroactively refunding the impact fees was 
possible as a policy matter.  
Vice Mayor Lauing explained the Planning Department is continuing to work 
on the housing element, which is what is holding up the issue of changing 
impact fees. He noted it was frustrating but that the issue would be 
addressed. He explained that there was about $1M given for charitable 
causes but not a dollar was given to anyone who did not deserve it. He also 
stated the amount requested was close to what the City could afford. 
Because of that, he wanted to have the right process in place to prioritize 
requests and determine amounts. He looked forward to that process to take 
a more rational approach. He questioned how comfortable or not residents 
should feel regarding fire stations that do not have an engine or a medical 
ambulance. He further noted the emergency medical response study was too 
expensive and took too long to work into the '25 budget. He asked if that 
study should include another fire engine. Finally, he noted a recent visit to 
the children's zoo, which was packed, making him less concerned about the 
price increase at peak time because people cannot get in and are 
disappointed.  
Fire Chief Blackshire explained the analysis used to decide how to deploy 
emergency response units, which are all deployed as a system. It is a 
predictive model using calls from the previous year to determine what units 
go where and what the response would look like on those same calls. He 
stated it was predictive and not completely accurate, but it was the best 
analysis to determine the level of service. He was confident this model was 
effective but also felt the community would be better served if there was 
another fire engine and ambulance in service. There were three models 
discussed in the budget hearing for the emergency medical response study: 
having a private or contract ambulance supplement the system, hiring an 
additional nine firefighters to staff the engine at Station 4, and using a 
single-role model, putting civilians on the ambulance and moving those 
firefighters to the fire engine. He thought it would be time well spent to look 
at all three models.  
Council Member Burt explained that when the request from Ability Path 
came forward, the Finance Committee did not know much about it or have 
enough information to act on, even though it may be a good initiative. He 
also looked forward to adjusting impact fees and agreed that Planning Staff 
has been overwhelmed as a result of the attention and resources required 
for the housing element. He felt that as long as housing advocates in the 
community undermine that by opposing approval, Staff would not be able to 
implement that to the degree necessary.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims felt Ability Path was a worthwhile 
organization but agreed with Council Member Burt about wanting to clearly 
understand what the use is and if the scope has changed since the initial 
ask. She also wanted to be mindful of the fact they received $100K this year 
from the Palo Alto Community Fund for a Dave Mitchell Impact Grant and 
that it was unclear to her if that was meant to leverage their ask. She 
believed if the impact fees were right-sized, it might actually increase 
revenue. She was delighted to see close to $100K for youth mental health 
and an additional $58K for HSRAP. She felt there was progress on fire with 
Fire Station 2 staffing being increased to full-time coverage rather than 
overtime, which costs more money. She was concerned about the impact of 
the JMZ rate on low-income families and asked how a subsidy for that would 
work.  
Kristen O’Kane, Community Services Director, responded that the JMZ offers 
various discounts at the door. The consultants had pointed out that if $14 is 
a barrier to entry, likely $10 is a barrier to entry, so she wanted to work on 
ways to provide more access outside of the daily ticket fee, for example free 
memberships so someone does not have to show proof of low income every 
time they come in.  
Council Member Kou clarified that Ability Path had more than one facility was 
looking for a $250K matching grant to fundraise and increase for this 
particular facility in Palo Alto. She hoped there was support tonight for 
moving it forward for the beginning of the year but otherwise looked forward 
to it coming back midyear. She felt that both TMA and Third Thursday had 
been redefined to require more contribution from the City and wanted more 
transparency about these kind of changes in the future.  
Council 
Member 
Veenker 
liked 
the 
discussion 
around 
low-income 
memberships for the JMZ. She hoped to be able to expedite Ability Path's 
request when the process comes back to Council and is established.  
MOTION: Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Mayor Stone, to: 
1. Adopt the Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Ordinance (Attachment A), which 
includes: 
a. City Manager’s Fiscal Year 2025 Proposed Operating and Capital 
Budgets, previously distributed at the May 6 City Council Meeting 
(Attachment A, Exhibit 1) 
i. Amend the Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Appropriation for the 
General Fund (requires a 2/3 vote) by:  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
A. Increasing 
expense 
appropriation 
for 
Human 
Services Resource Allocation Process (HSRAP) in the 
Community Services Department in the amount of 
$58,000; and  
B. Decreasing the Uncertainty Reserve by $58,000. 
b. Amendments to the City Manager’s Fiscal Year 2025 Proposed 
Operating Budget (Attachment A, Exhibit 2) 
c. Amendments to the City Manager’s Fiscal Year 2025 Proposed 
Capital Budget (Attachment A, Exhibit 3) 
d. Fiscal Year 2025 City Table of Organization (Attachment A, 
Exhibit 4); and 
e. Fiscal Year 2025 Municipal Fee Changes (Attachment A, Exhibit 
5) including Impact and In-Lieu Fees (Exhibit 6) 
2. Accept the Fiscal Year 2025 – 2029 Capital Improvement Plan 
3. Adopt a Resolution determining the Appropriations Limit for Fiscal Year 
2025 (Attachment B) 
4. Accept the June 30, 2023 biennial actuarial valuation of Palo Alto’s 
Retiree Healthcare Plan and approve funding of the Actuarial 
Determined Calculation (ADC) for Fiscal Year 2025 and Fiscal Year 
2026 with a two-year phase-in of the adjusted assumptions using the 
staff recommended funding level of $19.4 million and affirm the 
continued practice of transmitting amounts at a lower 5.75 percent 
discount rate as an additional discretionary payment to the City’s 
California Employers’ Retiree Benefit Trust (CERBT) Fund (Attachment 
D) 
Mayor Stone thought this budget did a good job at balancing the diverse 
needs within the community and especially appreciated funding for mental 
health. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Mayor Stone, to call 
the question. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no 
 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
29. 
PUBLIC HEARING & PROPOSITION 218 HEARING: Finance Committee 
Recommends Adoption of Six Resolutions: 1) Approving the Fiscal Year 
2025 Wastewater Collection Utility Financial Plan, Including Approval of 
a Short‐Term Loan From the Fiber Optics Fund Reserve to the 
Wastewater Collection Fund Operations Reserve for Fiscal Year 2024, 
and Amending Wastewater Collection Rate Schedules S‐1, S‐2, S‐6 and 
S‐7; 2) Approving the Fiscal Year 2025 Water Utility Financial Plan, and 
Amending Water Rate Schedules W‐1, W‐2, W‐3, W‐4, and W‐7; 3) 
Approving the Fiscal Year 2025 Gas Utility Financial Plan, and 
Amending Gas Rate Schedules G‐1, G‐2, G‐3 and G‐10; 4) Approving 
the Fiscal Year 2025 Electric Utility Financial Plan and Accepting the 
2024 City of Palo Alto Electric Cost of Service and Rate Study, and 
Amending Electric Rate Schedules E‐1, E‐2, E‐4, E‐4 TOU, E‐7, E‐7 TOU, 
E‐14, E‐EEC‐1, E‐NSE‐1, E‐2‐G, E‐4‐G and E‐7‐G; 5) Amending Utility 
Rate Schedules EDF‐1 and EDF‐2 to Increase Dark Fiber Rates 2.6 
Percent; 6) Amending Utility Rate Schedule D‐1 Increasing the Storm 
Water Management Fee by 2.6 Percent per Month per Equivalent 
Residential Unit for FY 2025; CEQA Status: Not a project under CEQA 
Guidelines Sections 15378(b)(4) and (5) and Exempt Under Section 
15273(a) 
Lisa Bilir, Senior Resources Planner, presented a table of the average rate 
increase projections, with a total proposed increase of 9%, which is $34.50 
for each average residential customer. This was proposed to and 
unanimously approved by the Utilities Advisory Commission in March. The 
Finance Committee made some changes in April, which are reflected in the 
proposal: to lower the proposed Water increase to 9.5% for the average 
residential customer and to increase the General Fund transfer amount for 
the Gas Fund from 11.9% to 14.5%. For Wastewater Collection, Staff 
recommends a 15% rate increase, or $7.29, and a short-term loan from the 
Fiber Optics Fund, not to exceed $3M and to be repaid in FY 26. At current 
rates, Palo Alto is 26% below the comparison city average, and at the 
proposed rate, Palo Alto will remain 14% below the comparison city average. 
Staff recommends a 9.5% Water rate increase. Rate increases of 9% will 
continue through 2029 to replenish reserves to within guideline ranges. For 
the Gas Utility, the proposal is for a 12.5% overall impact on the average 
residential customer.  
Micah Babbitt, Senior Resources Planner, explained that a Cost of Service 
Analysis highlighted the need to make interclass adjustments to ensure each 
customer class is being charged their cost to serve them. This resulted in a 
range of rate and bill impacts. Overall the median residential customer will 
see a 9% increase, $7 a month.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
Molly Stump, City Attorney, explained how the Proposition 218 meeting 
would be conducted. If the majority of the affected Water and Wastewater 
Collection customers have filed signed written protests against either or both 
of the proposed rate increases, they will not be imposed. Otherwise the City 
Council may proceed to adopt the proposed Water and Wastewater 
Collection rates by resolution by majority vote.  
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
1. Wendy M. stated that California is out of a state of drought and the 
largest reservoirs are more than 100% compared to normal levels. 
She was therefore surprised the rate would increase. She hoped the 
City was looking into federal funding for utilities where possible.  
2. Mary B. (Zoom) agreed with the previous commenter in the 
expectation that the rates would reduce. She wondered how Palo Alto 
would sustain long-term residents if the rates continue to go up. The 
9% increase seemed excessive and she asked to consider a much 
lower increase in the range of 2% to 3%.  
3. Peter D. (Zoom), speaking as a ratepayer and as policy director for the 
Tuolumne River Trust, discussed the skyrocketing water rates and 
gave some history on this. SFPUC states the alternative to the Bay 
Delta Plan is to invest in alternative water supplies, which would 
double the budget and double Palo Alto's rates. He proposed the City 
of Palo Alto and Utilities Advisory Commission host a workshop on the 
alternative water supply plan.  
Mayor Stone announced that it was the last opportunity to submit written 
protest on the Water and Wastewater Collection rates and to do so now. The 
Public Hearing was closed. Written protests on Water and Wastewater 
Collection rates were counted. There are 20,533 Water customers subject to 
the rate changes, meaning 10,267 protests were needed for a majority. 
There are 22,499 Wastewater Collection customers subject to rate changes, 
meaning 11,250 protests are needed for a majority.  
Mahealani Ah Yun, City Clerk, noted the written protests against the 
proposed Water rate change were 11 in total. She announced there were 11 
total written protests against the proposed Wastewater Collection rate 
change.  
Mayor Stone stated there was not a majority of written protests and the 
Council would adopt a resolution considering a Water rate and Wastewater 
Collection rate increase.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
Council Member Burt stated there was a multiyear period with essentially no 
increase during the pandemic hardship. He asked if there were other 
elements contributing to the current increase. He questioned the comparison 
of Electric rates for other cities and PG&E.  
Senior Resources Planner Bilir explained the funds in the Rate Stabilization 
Reserve and Operations Reserve have been used to minimize the rate 
increases needed. This plan utilizes all of the remaining $6M in the RSR over 
the next three years. The main reasons for rate increase this year are less 
revenue due to the draught and construction cost inflation leading to higher 
capital budget costs for the same infrastructure needs.  
Dean Batchelor, Utilities Director, further explained that utility inflation rate 
is almost 11%.  
Senior Resources Planner Babbitt recalled the latest number for PG&E was a 
14% increase with some nuance around that. He also presented a slide of 
Electric bill comparison by usage levels for current and proposed rates 
versus PG&E rates.  
Council Member Burt felt it was a striking difference, with the City's 
Electricity rates around half of PG&E's.  
Council Member Veenker discussed the Finance Committee's discussion 
about the rates and supported this proposal.  
Council Member Tanaka believed a reason for the increase was also the high 
amount going from Utilities to the General Fund every year and wanted 
more detail about the total counting the utility tax, transfers, and rent. He 
was interested in how much of the rate increase was due to the commodity 
and how much was flowing to the General Fund, which could be controlled.  
There was detailed discussion about this.  
Council Member Tanaka determined approximately $54M was transferred to 
the General Fund per year. He understood rate increases for commodity 
costs or construction costs but felt it was disingenuous to ratepayers when it 
was also due to these transfers. He did not support the rate increases and 
wanted to see a chart breaking down what is commodity versus General 
Fund, for transparency.  
There was discussion about the remaining agenda. It was decided to defer 
Item 31 to the next day, taking public testimony both at this meeting and at 
4 p.m. the next day.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
Council Member Burt clarified that the discretionary transfers are not in 
proportion to the rate increases but are lower. He explained the utility users 
tax was a voter-approved tax that the Council had no decision-making 
authority over. He also stated the discretionary transfers fund the strong 
police and fire, community services, parks, libraries, and roads. The City 
owns the utilities and transfer in the ballpark of what PG&E is allowed to 
have in profit, and the commercial users pay for the bulk of it.  
MOTION: Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Burt, to 
adopt the following: 
1. For the Wastewater Collection Utility, a Resolution (Attachment A): 
a. Approving the Wastewater Collection Utility Financial Plan for 
Fiscal Year (FY) 2025, including approval of a short-term loan 
from the Fiber Optics Fund Reserve to the Wastewater Collection 
Fund Operations Reserve not to exceed $3,000,000 for FY 2024; 
Amend the Fiscal Year 2024 Budget Appropriation Ordinance: In 
the Wastewater Collection Fund: 
i. Increase the Transfer In from the Fiber Optics Fund by 
$3.0 million 
ii. Increase the Ending Fund Balance by $3.0 million; and 
b. Amending the following Wastewater Collection Utility Rate 
Schedules to reflect increases effective July 1, 2024 (FY 2025): 
i. S-1 (Residential Wastewater Collection and Disposal), 
ii. S-2 (Commercial Wastewater Collection and Disposal), 
iii. S-6 (Restaurant Wastewater Collection and Disposal), and 
iv. S-7 (Commercial Wastewater Collection and Disposal – 
Industrial Discharger); 
2. For the Water Utility, a Resolution (Attachment B): 
a. 
Approving the FY 2025 Water Utility Financial Plan; and 
b. 
Amending the following Water Rate Schedules to reflect 
increases effective July 1, 2024 (FY 2025): 
i. W-1 (General Residential Water service), 
ii. W-2 (Water Service from Fire Hydrants), 
iii. W- 3 (Fire Service Connections), 
iv. W-4 
(Residential 
Master-Metered 
and 
General 
Non- 
Residential Water Service), and 
v. W-7 (Non-Residential Irrigation Water Service); 
3. For the Gas Utility, a Resolution (Attachment C): 
a. 
Approving the Gas Utility Financial Plan FY 2025, which 
includes amending the Gas Utility Reserve Management 
Practices; and 
b. 
Amending Gas Utility Rate Schedules FY 2025 to reflect 
increases effective July 1, 2024 (FY 2025): 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
i. G-1 Residential Gas Service, 
ii. G-2 Residential Master-Metered and Commercial Gas 
Service, 
iii. G-3 Large Commercial Gas Service, and G-10 Compressed 
Natural Gas Service); and 
c. 
Transferring up to 14.5% of gas utility gross revenues 
received during FY 2023 to the General Fund in FY 2025. 
4. For the Electric Utility, a Resolution (Attachment D): 
a. 
Accepting the 2024 City of Palo Alto Electric Cost of Service 
and Rate Study; 
b. 
Approving the Electric Utility Financial Plan FY 2025, which 
includes the following actions: 
i. Amending the Electric Utility Reserves Management 
Practices, to direct staff to transfer to the CIP reserve, at 
the end of each fiscal year, any budgeted capital 
investment that remains unspent, uncommitted, and which 
is not proposed for reappropriation to the following fiscal 
year and to clarify how the Cap and Trade Program 
Reserve is adjusted each year. 
ii. Approving the following transfers at the end of FY 2024: 
1. Up to $20 million from the Electric Special Projects 
Reserve to the Supply Operations Reserve; 
2. 2. Up to $17 million from the Supply Operations 
Reserve to the Hydroelectric Stabilization Reserve; 
3. Up to $58 million from the Supply Operations 
Reserve to the Distribution Operations Reserve; and 
iii. Approving the following transfers in FY 2025: 
1. Up to $26 million from the Distribution Operations 
Reserve to the Supply Operations Reserve; 
2. Up to $30 million from the Supply Operations 
Reserve to the Electric Special Projects Reserve; and 
3. Up to $5 million from the Distribution Operations 
Reserve to the CIP Reserve; 
c. 
Amending the following Electric Utility Rate Schedules 
effective July 1, 2024 (FY 2025): 
i.  E-1 (Residential Electric Service), E-2 (Small Non-
Residential Electric Service), E-4 (Medium Non-Residential 
Electric Service), E-4 TOU (Medium Non-Residential Time 
of Use Electric Service), E-7 (Large Non-Residential Electric 
Service), E-7 TOU (Large Non-Residential Time of Use 
Electric Service) and E-14 (Street Lights), each by varying 
percentages depending on rate schedule and consumption 
with an overall revenue increase of 0.5% effective July 1, 
2024; 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
ii. Decreasing the Net Surplus Electricity Compensation (E-
NSE-1) rate to reflect 2023 avoided cost, effective July 1, 
2024; and 
iii. Decreasing the Export Electricity Compensation (E-EEC-1) 
rate to reflect current projections of FY 2025 avoided cost, 
effective July 1, 2024; 
iv. Updating the Residential Master-Metered and Small Non-
Residential Green Power Electric Service (E-2-G), the 
Medium Non-Residential Green Power Electric Service (E-
4-G), and the Large Non-Residential Green Power Electric 
Service (E 7 G) rate schedules to reflect modified 
distribution and commodity components, effective July 1, 
2024. 
5. A Resolution (Attachment E) Amend the Fiscal Year 2024 Budget 
Appropriation Ordinance: In the Fiber Optics Fund: 
i. Increase the Transfer Out to the Wastewater Collection 
Fund by 3.0 million 
ii. Decrease the Ending Fund Balance by $3.0 million; and 
amending Fiber Optic Utility Rate Schedules EDF-1 and 
EDF-2 to increase Dark Fiber Rates 2.6 percent effective 
July 1, 2024, consistent with the applicable Consumer 
Price Index; 
6. A Resolution (Attachment F) amending Storm Water Management Fee 
Rate Schedule D-1 to increase the Storm Water Management Fee by 
2.6 percent effective July 1, 2024, consistent with the applicable 
Consumer Price Index. 
Council Member Lauing explained this has been well vetted by the UAC and 
Finance Committee.  
Council Member Kou asked why the Water utility is continued at 9% in the 
out years. She questioned if the commodity rates for all utilities are fair and 
comparable. She was interested in an alternative water supply plan 
workshop.  
Senior Resource Planner Bilir explained the Finance Committee was 
interested in making sure the increase was not too great in any one year, so 
the distribution rate increase was designed to balance out with the 
commodity rate increases. For the Water utility, the City pays the same rate 
that all the wholesale customers pay per unit of water.  
Council Member Tanaka proposed a friendly amendment to do a full 
comparison of utility bills, including all line items, against other cities and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
also have a breakdown of how much of the rate is commodity and how much 
is General Fund transfer.  
Vice Mayor Lauing did not accept the friendly amendment and suggested 
referring to UAC.  
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no 
 
30. 
Approve Retention of the Current Western Area Power Administration 
(WAPA) Hydroelectricity Base Resource Contract Allocation From 
2025‐2030; CEQA Status: Not a Project. 
Lena Perkins, Senior Resource Planner, explained the City's current contract 
for hydro power from the Central Valley Project will expire at the end of 
Calendar Year 2024. The surplus hydro power purchased is called Base 
Resource Hydroelectricity, and of this entire project, Palo Alto Utilities 
receives about 12%. If the Council chooses, up to 98% of that allocation can 
be extended for the next 5 years and potentially beyond. Council already 
preliminarily approved this when the contract was signed 4 years ago, but 
the last chance to exit this is June 30 of this year. There is a flat fee every 
year no matter how much electricity the City gets, and that flat fee has been 
going down in relative terms due to working with WAPA and the Bureau of 
Reclamation to optimize the value. She presented a conservative analysis of 
the valuation estimate with WAPA contract extension through 2030. Staff 
recommended following the UAC's recommendation that the City keep the 
full share of its allocated hydroelectric resource under the current contract.  
MOTION: Council Member Burt moved, seconded by Council Member 
Veenker, to keep the City of Palo Alto’s full share of its allocated 
hydroelectric resource under the current hydroelectricity supply contract, the 
2025 Base Resource Contract from Sierra Nevada Region of the Western 
Area Power Administration (2025 WAPA Contract), as approved by Council in 
February of 2021 (Staff Report #116791). 
Note: No action from City Council is required to remain in the contract at the 
current resource allocation percentage (12.06299%). Staff will revisit project 
financial impact in 2029 and make a recommendation for the period of 2030 
through 2034. The decision to reduce the contract allocation or terminate 
the contract will be revisited every five years until the last termination 
opportunity in 2049. 
Council Member Burt felt this was a good deal and the City was fortunate to 
have it. It remains a challenge to have strong low-cost baseline power with 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
variable solar and wind, which are declining in cost but not available all day 
long.  
Council Member Veenker was grateful for the analysis and agreed this was a 
great deal. She noted the cost of service study resulting in awareness of 
previous overpayment by the City which is being returned by WAPA through 
2030 but will not be reimbursed if the City exits the contract in 2025. She 
asked for explanation.  
Senior Resource Planner Perkins agreed it seemed wrong and explained 
WAPA's reasoning for this and that they have tried to return most of the 
money by 2025.  
Council Member Tanaka asked if there was a chart showing the unit cost 
difference between this power and solar or natural gas. He asked about the 
seasonal mismatch with hydroelectricity and how it matches up to the City's 
needs. He asked if there are derivatives to mitigate uncertainty.  
Senior Resource Planner Perkins presented a chart showing WAPA at 
$31/Mwh and market power $57/Mwh. She stated it has become more of an 
hourly mismatch than a seasonal mismatch problem and this was built into 
the model. The flexibility and carbon-free support of the electrical system 
and value of this product outweighs the seasonal and other mismatches in 
any model. She stated there are no derivatives. The City self insures with 
the Hydroelectric Reserve Fund triggered in the drought because it is 
cheaper but is looking to diversity the overall portfolio to lower exposure to 
hydroelectric cycles.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
 
31. 
Discussion Regarding Caltrans’ Repaving Project on El Camino Real 
Replacing Existing Parking with Bicycle Lanes, Authority for Staff to 
Make Adjustments to the Residential Preferential Parking Permit 
Programs and Return to Council on Consent if Needed, Authority for 
Staff to Enter into Agreements As Needed to Provide Temporary Safe 
Parking Along the Corridor in Palo Alto, and Approval of a Resolution 
Supporting the Removal of On‐Street Parking for this Project; CEQA 
status – categorically exempt. 
Item continued to June 18, 2024, Special City Council Meeting. 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 27 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes: 06/17/2024 
1. Terry H. strongly believed there was a lack of common sense of 
putting bike riders within inches of vehicles on El Camino Real going 
up to 50 miles an hour. He asked Council to consider how they would 
feel if someone got into a major accident in that bike lane.  
2. Paul M. stated it would be cheaper, safer, and faster to extend the bike 
lane beyond Paly along the tracks all the way to San Jose than the 
project on El Camino. Taking parking off El Camino would negatively 
affect the businesses in the area, and he asked Council not to support 
this.  
3. Richard H. speaking on behalf of Chamber of Commerce, was 
concerned with the proposal to removing parking on El Camino. He 
asked that if Council supports this decision, they also take the 
following actions: evaluate opportunities for businesses along El 
Camino Real to purchase parking passes in adjacent RPP districts; 
explore opportunities for businesses along El Camino Real to gain 
additional opportunities within the Palo Alto TMA, including the 
possibility of free or reduced transit passes for employees; and add 
short-term parking spaces to perpendicular side streets that intersect 
with El Camino in areas of existing retail.  
4. Gregg F., owner of The Bike Connection and Cardinal Bike Shop, 
stated Palo Altans care more about parking than about bike lanes. This 
will push employee parking into neighborhoods and push businesses to 
other cities and will not make it safer.  
5. Keri W. (Zoom), President of Palo Alto Council of PTAs, stated the PTA 
Council Executive Board has voted to support the staff report, 
specifically the no-right-turn-on-red restrictions recommended by City 
Staff and Caltrans.  
 
ADJOURNMENT: The meeting was adjourned at 11:18 P.M. 
 
