CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 19 
 Regular Meeting 
 
August 5, 2024 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual 
teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Kou, Lauing, Lythcott-Haims, Stone, Tanaka, Veenker 
 
Council Member Tanaka Arrived at 5:32 P.M. 
Present Remotely:  
Absent: 
 
Call to Order 
Mayor Stone called the session to order. The clerk called roll, noting six present. 
Special Orders of the Day 
1. 
Interview Candidates for Vacancies on Historic Resources Board 
NO ACTION 
Caroline Willis thanked Council for adding her property on Emerson to the historic inventory. 
She remarked that if she was allowed to continue on the Board, one thing she would like to do 
is make the process for getting historic properties on the inventory easier. She recalled being 
on the HRB in the 90s and then coming back on 3 years ago. She commented that progress had 
been made but felt there was a lot more to do including providing incentives, public 
engagement and achieving more accuracy.   
Council Member Burt queried if Ms. Willis could provide examples of incentives she thought 
might be added to the current program.  
Ms. Willis answered that she would like to push forward the Mills Act and provide financial 
incentives. She thought recognition was great but opined some people do not like recognition 
these days. She was baffled by the stigma attached to some of the properties on the inventory 
and that working on incentives would inspire people to better maintain those properties and 
hold out for buyers who place more value on them. She expressed a desire for demolition 
protection in Palo Alto. She hoped they could move toward preserving their built environment.   
Council Member Veenker inquired if Ms. Willis thought there were any talents and experiences 
she thought Council should supplement on the HRB.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
Ms. Willis mentioned that a lot of the architects had left the HRB. She thought understanding 
the architecture was important and that is what the Council should be looking for.  
Mayor Stone asked if Ms. Willis had thoughts on how the City could better recognize and 
highlight their many historical treasures.  
Ms. Willis mentioned the brochures on Professorville and thought those were important to 
have out in the library. She thought an audio tour could be done in association with those. She 
stated her focus over the next couple of years, whether she was reappointed or not, would be 
education for the Community and working on sharing the historical stores of the City. She 
closed by stating she was happy to see preservation moving forward again. She mentioned that 
the Board was going down to five members and although she did not support the reason it 
happened, she thought five members made for a more cohesive voice making the Board 
stronger.  
Geddes Ulinskas provided some history having trained in New York as an architect. He 
discussed unique projects he had worked on in the past. He talked about his experiences 
working as a residential architect in San Francisco that included a number of restoration 
projects. He moved to Palo Alto four years prior and discussed his observations of the most 
successful parts of the City from a preservation standpoint. He discussed a recent visit to Bryant 
Park in New York where he recalled a process of privatization and cooperation between the 
businesses, entities and the city and was curious to know if there were opportunities in Palo 
Alto to partner with some businesses in a similar way.  
Council Member Veenker questioned Mr. Ulinskas if it was a fair statement to say that he 
appreciated balance, form and function and historical context but modern day sensibility. 
Mr. Ulinskas confirmed that statement to be correct.  
Vice Mayor Lauing requested Mr. Ulinskas’ point of view of the recent decisions that were 
made in terms of how one gets on the historic homes list or can stay off of it. He was surprised 
at how controversial that was and asked if he had an opinion on a way to adjudicate that. He 
wanted Mr. Ulinskas’ thought on what they should do with respect to preservations to the 
point of not allowing demolitions.  
Mr. Ulinskas opined it all had to do with property value. In his experience, the people who 
appreciate historic homes tend to be more in mid-level neighborhoods with more reasonable 
pricing whereas very desirable neighborhoods with larger lots tend to draw the kind of owner 
whose agenda is to scrape everything. He does not know the answer to how to appeal to that 
kind of owner and make preservation sexy. He closed by stating he has always loved being part 
of the preservation built environment conversation and felt he would enjoy being a part of the 
Board.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
Zachary Pozner discussed his background as Director of Architecture at Stanford University. He 
recalled having interviewed for the ARB previously. He was eager to talk about anything related 
to historic preservation.  
Council Member Burt asked Mr. Pozner to share a little more about his sense of the importance 
of historic preservation in Palo Alto, why and how that relates to the very significant 
developments, particularly in housing, that are on the horizon and how those two objectives 
might be reconciled.  
Mr. Pozner spoke about his experiences with renovation, preservation and restoration and 
projects he had worked on in the past. He thought a big part of the restoration dialog was 
about embodied carbon but also recognized that some buildings have outlived their useful life 
so it was about balance. He liked the different viewpoints that were represented on the HRB. 
He admitted he was not an expert about historic homes but was eager to learn.  
Mayor Stone questioned what in particular interested Mr. Pozner about historical pieces and 
his thoughts on how the HRB could be more involved in things like the Palo Alto History 
Museum and other areas that would be outside of his architectural expertise.  
Mr. Pozner commented that his interest in the Board was about getting to know the Palo Alto 
community in general, getting educated about what was there and valuable to everyone and to 
hear other viewpoints about that. If he got involved with the HRB, he would learn more about 
the History Museum. He felt he could collaborate with Amy French well and flex to meet a lot of 
different roles and responsibilities if needed. 
Barry Katz provided a background of his professional experience. He admitted to not having 
detailed knowledge of window treatments, roof lines and some of the things that have been of 
concern to the Historic Resources Board and Architectural Preservation. He described himself 
professionally as a historian and could offer a somewhat different perspective on the question 
of historic significance and preservation. He had wavered between applying for a position on 
the Historic Resources Board and Architectural Preservation Group. He described disappointed 
by some the things he heard in the Architecture Review to include statements about the Fry’s 
building. He thought Palo Alto’s natural environment and it being the capital of the 21st century 
needed to be recognized and preserved.  
Council Member Burt asked Mr. Katz to speak more about how understanding of design would 
integrate with the sense of being the custodians of architectural history. 
Mr. Katz explained that being a custodian of the past entailed recognizing everything that had 
gone into it and thinking about how to keep it alive and vital under the continuously changing 
circumstances of the present. He was interested in figuring out how to create an appropriate 
balance between preserving what has been done and growing with technology.  
Vice Mayor Lauing inquired how Mr. Katz viewed preservation ultimately reaching city 
ordinances so that the guidelines can be there but there is flexibility and balance in the future.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
Mr. Katz admitted he would have a lot of homework to do in bringing himself up to speed in 
this particular group and was prepared to do that. He described having an interest in thinking 
about how they might be able to coordinate their thinking about historic preservation and 
historic resources with the companies that have essentially given the identity to this 
community. He stated he had spent a lot of time with various larger tech companies going 
through their archives and speaking with some of the people that have been responsible for 
preserving that. He expressed his interest in being a voice on the Historic Resources Board that 
connects to some of the larger private enterprises and thinking about how we might be able to 
coordinate a joint effort to help define and preserve what is unique about the region. 
Council Member Veenker wanted to know what more he would offer in terms of recognizing 
and preserving the history of the Fry’s building.  
Mr. Katz thought that the idea of a plaque to preserve and respect the past was a pathetic 
gesture and he would like to be the voice on the Preservation Board to add depth and richness 
to that discussion.  
Council Member Kou appreciated that Mr. Katz looked beyond to pre-Silicon Valley times and 
looked forward to hearing his vision for North Ventura Coordinated Plan and Barron Park.  
Mayor Stone announced they would be voting on appointments the following week.  
Closed Session 
2. 
CONFERENCE WITH REAL PROPERTY NEGOTIATORS. 
Authority: Government Code Section 54956.8. 
Property: 4000 Middlefield Road, Palo Alto (Informally known as the Cubberley Site). 
Negotiating Party: Palo Alto Unified School District. 
City Negotiators: (Ed Shikada, Kiely Nose, Kristen O'Kane, Sunny Tong). 
Subject of Negotiations: Purchase, Exchange, and/or Lease, Price and Terms of Payment 
Public Comment: Aram J. (Zoom) expressed his disappointment of this item being held in closed 
session. He requested a reasonable explanation as to why those negotiations would not be 
open for public input.  
MOTION:  Council Member Veenker moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to go into 
Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 6:16 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 7:40 P.M. 
Mayor Stone announced no reportable action. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, announced no changes.  
Public Comment 
Mayor Stone discussed new rules implemented for public comment and went over ground 
rules. He provided a warning that there would be graphic videos shown. 
1. 
Estelle C., Abitare Homeowners Association, spoke on behalf of (7): Cheryl B., Rochelle 
G., Jaclyn S., Magdalena M., Gerald F., Mary F., homeowners who were afraid to access 
their storage spaces in Parking Lot Q which is a shared space with Abitare due to the 
unhoused population who frequent this area. She remarked about the foul smell due to 
urine and feces and the health hazard that presented. She brought these conditions to 
the attention of Police Captain Wagner who informed her that Parking Lot Q is a public 
space and the unhoused have a right to be there. She also mentioned the elevator in the 
new parking structure next to California Street Farmers Market that exits onto Parking 
Lot Q. She asked for Council’s attention in addressing this issue.  
2. 
Talha B., spoke on behalf of (6): Tuba, Imaan, Lea, Nol, Mona (Presentation). He 
expressed outrage and disgust by the Council’s unwillingness to take a stand against 
genocide in Gaza. He provided graphic video depicting the events in Gaza. He demanded 
Council nullify the resolution preventing commenting on foreign affairs, immediately 
pass a ceasefire resolution and divest from all Israeli businesses, educational 
institutions, and government officials that engage in and uphold apartheid and genocide 
against Palestinians. 
3. 
Deborahlise M. (Presentation) gave a presentation discussing an event that led to a 
massive right to rape violent mob protest in Israel. She believed Palo Alto was blindly 
supporting this depravity. She mentioned that Palo Alto previously divested from 
apartheid South Africa and now was legally obligated to divest from apartheid Israel and 
should begin discussions immediately.  
4. 
Dich T. requested the City address the newspaper metallic boxes on the street due to 
safety and aesthetic issues.  
5. 
Avroh S. spoke about the airport expansion plans. He did not support allowing the 
runway to expand into the wildlife sanctuaries and mentioned a petition that he would 
be presenting regarding this.  
6. 
Diane M. shared concerns about the Palo Alto Airport expansion plans.  
7. 
Uzma thanked Council Members Lythcott-Haims and Veenker and Pastor Kaloma Smith 
for supporting the Juneteenth and Eid joint picnic and bringing the communities 
together.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
8. 
Bob M. described attempting to provide paperwork to City Hall by email with no results 
so he then physically took it to City Hall where he discovered the elevator to be locked. 
He then dropped the paperwork off with the utility staffer. He reminded Council that 
City Hall belonged to the community and not to the City Manager.  
9. 
Natalie N. announced that she was conducting ethnographic research at City Council 
meetings for a project at Stanford University in which she has been observing regular 
City Council meetings virtually and taking notes. She would continue to do this until 
November and would be happy to address any questions or concerns. She also asked for 
anyone in attendance willing to discuss their experiences in the meetings with her to 
contact her.   
10. 
Greg H. brought up issues with the rail crossing project to include not meeting climate 
change initiatives and the excessive costs. He suggested instead spending the money on 
mental health and education, supporting commerce by improving University and 
California and increasing housing and public transit.  
11. 
Shani K., Santa Clara Valley Audubon Society representative, described the declining 
population in the Baylands and talked about creatures that had been listed as 
endangered. She declared they were worth protecting.   
12. 
Dashiel L., Conservation Coordinator for the Sierra Club Loma Prieta Chapter, addressed 
the Palo Alto Long-Range Facilities and Sustainability Plan update for the airport asking 
why it is happening, what grants the airport has received in the past and what 
mandatory conditions they are beholden to with these grants, who is responsible for 
approving this master plan and if it is expected that the project will require a vote to 
undedicate parkland and fill in jurisdictional wetlands.  
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Veenker mentioned the Urban Heat Island Mapping Training Project could use 
volunteers if anyone was interested. She explained that it is part of the National Oceanic 
Atmospheric Administration's project, (NOAA). It is being led by PASC. Volunteers drive a route 
with a heat sensor on three different times a day with a navigator. They are looking to see 
which parts of the town are how hot when so they could learn to adapt.   
Council Member Kou requested that the Finance Committee remember to discuss the 
AbilityPath grant asking for matching funds at the meeting being held the following night. She 
added they hoped to debut this at an upcoming fundraiser in October.  
Mayor Stone announced that he had appointed Vice Mayor Lauing to the Stanford Ad Hoc 
Committee and Council Member Tanaka to the City Schools Committee.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims acknowledged the news of her poor judgment 13 years ago, 
which recently came to light. Regarding her service to the City, she asked to be judged on how 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
she performed her work. She stressed that she, her colleagues and staff have strived to achieve 
goals for creating more housing, protecting the climate, strengthening the local economy, 
improving mental health, separating the train from the road, building a community center, 
fostering a greater sense of belonging in all people and so much more. She would remain in 
service to finding solutions to these vital issues.  
Consent Calendar 
Mahealani Ah Yun, City Clerk, announced that live translation would be offered for any 
members of the public interested in making public comment in a language other than English 
and provided instructions.  
Public Comment: 
1. 
Preston P., Executive Director of the Santa Clara County Housing Authority, spoke on 
behalf of (5): Flaherty W., Sarah W., Nathan H. Melodie C. (Item 5) expressing 
disappointment in having the Item 5 pulled and moved to the following week. He 
described the progress they have made to date. He indicated that they were ready to 
submit an application for tax credits and tax-exempt bonds for the apartments on 
August 27. If they miss that date, the next opportunity to apply will be in 2025 creating 
significant delays in the redevelopment of Buena Vista and cost increases. They were 
aware of a small number of households whose expectations were not being fully met 
but admitted they would never be able to fully meet everyone’s expectations. He 
deemed it unfair to hold up progress of new homes for over 50 families due to concerns 
of a small number of residents. He agreed to meet with any member who would like to 
discuss any of the topics before next week's meeting and hoped they would be able to 
move forward at that time.   
2. 
Dich T. (Item 5) sought the help of Council and the Housing Authority in in moving the 
project forward.  
3. 
Winter D. (Item 5) presented her concerns and hoped the City Attorney’s Office would 
do some research to confirm some of the information from Housing Authority. She 
encouraged the city attorney to review relevant law and regulations affecting the Palo 
Alto live-work preference, Section 8, and the waiting list structure so the City may 
determine for itself if any of this can change in support of a meaningful and effective 
Palo Alto live-work preference. She hoped the Housing Authority's Transportation Plan 
would be included in the regulatory agreement and would have good oversight.  
4. 
Aram J. (Zoom) requested that Molly Stump address the issue of whether the city has 
authority to take the cost of this, in his opinion frivolous, lawsuit out of the pocketbooks 
of the 6 officers if the City prevails in Item 4. Regarding Item 5, it was his belief that 
Buena Vista is a segregated environment. He hoped at least 20 percent of low income 
housing would be set aside for African Americans.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
5. 
Manuel (Zoom) spoke on behalf of SV@H to express strong support for Item 5 urging 
the City to approve this project when comes up again and continue to support initiatives 
that promote housing affordability within the community and within Palo Alto. 
Council Member Stone, Kou, Lythcott-Haims requested to Pull Agenda Item Number 5. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Council Member Veenker to approve 
Agenda Item Numbers 3-4, 6-7 and to pull off Consent Agenda Item 5. 
MOTION PASSED 3-4, 6-7:  7-0 
3. 
Approval of Minutes from June 17, 2024 and June 18, 2024 Meetings 
4. 
Authorization to Execute an Amendment to Legal Services Contract S22183520 with 
Liebert Cassidy Whitmore to Increase Amount by $150,000 for Total Not-to-Exceed 
Amount of $320,000 and to Extend the Term; CEQA Status – Not a Project. 
5. 
PUBLIC HEARING/QUASI-JUDICIAL. Buena Vista Mobile Home Park Redevelopment/3980 
El Camino Real [24PLN-00041; 24PLN-00129] Approval of a Vesting Tentative Map to 
Subdivide One Existing 4.5-acre Parcel into Two Parcels and to Approve a Streamlined 
Housing Development Review Application for a 61-unit Apartment Building. The Project 
Also Includes 44 Mobile Homes, which are Regulated by the State, and Authorization for 
the City Manager to Execute Amended Regulatory Agreements. Environmental 
Assessment: Exempt from the Provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act in 
Accordance with CEQA Guidelines Section 15332 (In-fill Development). Zoning District: 
RM-20. 
6. 
Adoption of a Resolution Establishing Fiscal Year 2025 Property Tax Levy for General 
Obligation Bonds (Measure N Libraries); CEQA Status: Not a Project 
7. 
SECOND READING: Adopt an Ordinance and Resolution Extending the Interim Parklet 
Program to the Car-Free Portion of Ramona Street through March 2025; CEQA status - 
categorically exempt (FIRST READING: June 18, 2024 PASSED 7-0) 
City Manager Comments 
 
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, announced that Item 5 would be heard the following week on August 
12, 2024. He provided a slide presentation discussing August events and activities, Back to 
School sustainability and safety, engagement and feedback opportunities, City Hall Open House 
save the date and notable tentative upcoming Council items.  
Action Items 
8. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Consideration of Objections for Weed Abatement Assessments; and 
Adoption of Resolution Confirming the Weed Abatement Report and Ordering 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
Abatement Costs to be a Special Assessment on the Properties Specified in the Report; 
CEQA status - categorically exempt. 
City Manager Shikada suggested going to public comment and then proceeding with the action.   
Public Comment: Aram J. (Zoom) indicated that he had sent correspondence to the Mayor and 
Fire Marshal Tamara Jasso containing a bunch of Public Records Act requests regarding the 
safety of a particular apartment complex in the City of Palo Alto. He was impressed with Fire 
Marshal Jasso’s responses. He did not understand why the department remained short staffed 
and station number four did not have a fire truck. He urged City Council to push the City 
Manager to rectify this. He wanted it to be known that the City Manager was the fourth highest 
paid city manager. 
City Manager Shikada stated given that there were no objections from property owners they 
had a recommendation for your adoption.  
Council Member Kou inquired how messages would be delivered to the owner of 3120 Kelper, 
who is currently living in a convalescent home and who she should contact if she required help 
understanding things.  
Santa Clara County Representative explained they send all documentation they have through 
the address that is on the deed to the assessor’s office. This could be changed by reaching out 
to the Procurement Officer's office and change the address on file with the assessor's office to 
be able to change the mailing address. She added that the owner or anyone assisting her could 
reach out to their office for assistance.   
MOTION:  Mayor Stone moved, seconded by Council Member Burt to adopt a resolution 
confirming the report and ordering abatement costs to be a special assessment on the 
properties specified in the report (Attachment A). 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
9. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of a Resolution Implementing the North Ventura 
Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP), Amending the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Certifying 
the Supplemental Environmental Impact Report, Including a Statement of Overriding 
Considerations; and FIRST READING: an Ordinance Adding Chapter 18.29 and Amending 
Chapters 18.14, 18.24, and 16.65 in the Palo Alto Municipal Code as well as 
Amendments to the Zoning District Map, and Rezoning of Parcels Within the NVCAP 
area. CEQA Status -- Supplemental Environmental Impact Report SCH #2023020691. 
Jonathan Lait, Planning Director, recognized that this was the culmination of a nearly seven-
year effort to develop a vision for a walkable North Ventura neighborhood with housing 
services, ground floor retail, parks and an interconnected street grid. He thought the plan had 
changed a little since it was last seen by Council in November 2022 but remained consistent 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
with the spirit and intent of where the Council is going but would be happy to make 
adjustments and changes as needed. 
Kelly Cha, Senior Planner, provided a slide presentation covering NVCAP objectives, plan area, 
timeline, goals and objectives, public engagement, Council endorsed plan, Board and 
Commission feedback, document contents, zoning implementation, environmental review and 
staff recommendation.  
Public Comment: 
1. 
Jeff L. spoke on behalf of (5): Andie R., Hank S., Kristen V.F., Hamilton H. about the 
proposed ordinance elimination of all parking requirements for North Ventura. He 
talked about elements of the proposal that were not discussed in the presentation. He 
urged Council to review the ordinance to leave the current parking requirements in 
place along with any other changes made.  
2. 
Becky S. stated she had previously sent a letter to Council. She spoke about some 
objections she had to the ordinance and would appreciate if Council would direct staff 
to correct this continued bullying and abuse of Ventura.  
3. 
Terry H. brought an exhibit to show Council his work on the project as a part of the 
NVCAP working group. He indicated that only half of their work had been acknowledged 
and the rest was ignored, forgotten or overlooked by City staff and Council. He 
remarked that the work and recommendations made by the citizens should be 
recognized.  
4. 
Tom G. (Zoom), architect, requested support on behalf of the property owners that may 
have existing office buildings that will become non-conforming and be subject to 
significant restrictions.  
5. 
Janettedelia (Zoom), COO of Jay Paul Company and owner of 395 Page Mill Road, 
indicated her company was generally in support of the proposed plan but they recently 
learned that the change to a non-conforming status would present risk to the future 
continued use of their building as well as potential rebuilding risk in the event of a 
casualty. They respectfully requested that their existing commercial office use zoning 
designation be grandfathered in in such a way that the use remain conforming. 
6. 
Cedric (Zoom) hoped Council would direct staff to start soon to plan for the 
renaturalization of the creek and the creation of the park space in the area that was 
obtained from Sobrato. He also mentioned the importance of being aware of the height 
at which the daylight plane commences. Otherwise, he approved of the plan.  
7. 
Aram J. (Zoom) stressed the need to make certain that 20 percent of the housing 
minimum of this project would be dedicated to members of the African American 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
community in perpetuity. He directed that Council needed to voluntarily implement 
reparations  to make amends for historical wrongs visited on the Black community.  
Council Member Kou addressed the public comment regarding no parking for people with 
disabilities and no EV cars allowed. She understood it to be a 530 unit development.  
Director Lait confirmed he thought the projected units to be around that number. With regard 
to parking, the code did not say those things could not be provided but that they were not 
required. He discussed the challenges posed. He said staff would do more work on it and 
present it to the decision makers.  
Council Member Kou asked if what was being asked of Council was to adopt certain chapters of 
the municipal code. She pointed out that diversity, equity, inclusion and belonging were not 
being addressed if ADA parking was not being provided.  
Director Lait replied that the ordinance before Council did not require parking for any use, 
except for hotels which is carved out of that state law, in the North Ventura Coordinated Area 
Plan boundary. He provided a slide of a map of AB 2097 that raised a question as to whether 
parking ought to be required for the balance of the properties that are not located within the 
AB 2097 boundary. Council had the option to direct staff to apply the Municipal Code parking 
standards for any of the land uses for the area outside of AB 2097.  
Vice Mayor Lauing remarked he felt they should retain parking in the area not covered. He 
wanted to know if there were other legal opinions on what they could or could not do with the 
current laws in place for parking. Regarding the special setback, he understood the implication 
to be that more study would be done and it might be added to the ordinance later.  
Senior Planner Cha confirmed that was a possibility if the City Council would like the staff to 
look into it. It was not actually part of the scope of the NVCAP but something that came up 
during the Planning and Transportation Commission discussion.  
Director Lait added that Council would have to give them direction to do that.  
Vice Mayor Lauing queried if existing Office Park 3241 was being grandfathered in essentially 
because it was already in application. He asked if that was a requirement. He asked for 
clarification on the number of housing units.  
Senior Planner Cha confirmed that to be correct and said if it was deemed complete, it was 
considered a pipeline project that was considered prior to the NVCAP adoption.  
Albert Yang, Assistant City Attorney, answered that pipeline projects could be excluded and 
that could be a feature of the ordinance.  
Director Lait remarked the housing element projections were about 300 and the totality 
housing production anticipated over a 2040 horizon was about 550 or so.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
Council Member Lythcott-Haims wanted Staff’s thoughts about the adequacy of FAR and height 
limits versus daylight plane when trying to control the mass of a building and its impact on 
whatever is around it.  
Coleman Frick, Long Range Planning Manager, explained that as staff evaluated those 
recommendations, they were compelled by the daylight plane as a mechanism to reduce 
unintended impacts to existing developed single family residential properties. They also looked 
at all the work that had gone into getting to the point through the working group to the Council 
endorsed and refined endorsed plan and wanted to balance both of those things in terms of 
making it so there was an ability for the vision of the NVCAP to be completed in terms of what 
sort of development could realistically occur from a kind of a standpoint from the developer to 
get the units and the vision of the NVCAP to have it be a walkable sort of mixed use 
development. Therefore, in some places they did recommend increasing the height limit based 
on those recommendations but in other places they did not go quite as high as what was 
recommended for maximum height in an effort to make sure that there was a height 
differential between those other zoning districts.  
Chair Baltay explained how a daylight plane would minimize the impact on the surrounding 
community while allowing them to have higher building masses. 
Council Member Burt did not think it should be extended beyond where it was required. He 
wanted to know how AB 2097 would work if it was adopted now. He asked if they could get rid 
of existing parking the way the plan was written.   
Director Lait explained if Council adopted what was before them, it would be possible to 
impose a requirement that those projects comply with the policy change on requiring ADA and 
EV parking. They did run a risk that for some housing projects where an application was filed 
consistent with SB 330 application and it was locked into the standards and placed at the time 
regardless of whether the policy was changed later. He stated that existing parking would be a 
conversion of one use to another.  
Assistant City Attorney Yang stated AB 2097 uses the term development project and in some 
places uses the term new development for more specific instructions. The words development 
project are seen as being broader than a tear down and rebuild. 
Council Member Burt wanted to know what the boundaries were.  
Assistant City Attorney Yang explained development project was not specifically defined in AB 
2097 but elsewhere in the government code it seemed to mean basically anything that requires 
a building permit. 
Council Member Burt thought that sounded like a subject open to legal interpretation. He did 
not want to just accept on face value that it does apply to anything and everything. He queried 
if there was confidence that the parking impacts have been covered by the EIR. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
Director Lait replied the California Environmental Quality Act does not have parking as a 
criterion to assess environmental impacts and it is not studied as a part of EIR's parking. 
Council Member Venker asked if Staff would respond to the totality of height versus daylight 
plane versus massing, how they work together and how that might affect their 
recommendation about the height limits. She wanted to understand more about the park space 
on page 340 of the packet. She saw a naturalized creek and an observation deck and wondered 
if the park space went under that.  
Senior Planner Cha provided slides showing how the daylight plane works with the setback. She 
explained the naturalization of the creek would require direction from City Council to initiate 
the analysis in partnership and coordination with the Valley Water who has easement over the 
Creek for their operations and maintenance so it would depend on the outcome of that study. 
They were proposing the full naturalization which included a hundred foot riparian buffer. She 
explained the drawing Council Member Veenker referred to was a conceptual illustration for 
the NVCAP area, especially for the ecological concept showing potential ways to have open 
space. 
 
Director Lait added daylight plane could be used as another mechanism to regulate height. He 
indicated as part of the Sobrato development agreement, three acres would be transferred 
over to the city. Two acres would be dedicated toward open space and one acre would be 
dedicated to a future affordable housing project. He added Council would have discretion on 
how it wants to see this land that we would get through the development agreement used for 
public purposes. 
Mayor Stone questioned if the new map was showing there would be proportional parking 
reduction for a property that straddled both lines. He believed the parking issue would have to 
come back based on the night’s discussion.  
Director Lait thought the areas covered within the radius were exempt and the areas outside of 
it were not. He suggested that if Council were interested in requiring parking outside of AB 
2097, that direction could be given as part of the motion that says just use the standard parking 
requirements of the code. The issue of whether AB 2097 straddles a line and how that 
addresses that's going to apply throughout the city was still unknown.  
Mayor Stone asked how it would impact the anticipated number of housing units if they were 
to follow the PTC recommendation and how the changes proposed that night would impact the 
17 sites identified in the in the housing element. He did not want to risk derailing getting the 
housing element certified by the state by making significant changes.  
Long Range Planning Manager Frick explained the housing element treats those sites as an 
overlay of development standards. If there is a housing opportunity site, if the base zoning, 
what is under consideration this evening with implementing the NVCAP through the ordinance 
that's before you, that would not impact what is in the housing element because each 
individual site in the housing element essentially has its overriding development standards that 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
have already been analyzed separately as part of that process. Housing inventory sites 
standards would not be impacted by NVCAP zoning. 
Director Lait added housing opportunity sites have their own standards so making a change 
here would not affect the housing element. He asked Assistant City Attorney Yang if lowering 
the height from existing 50 feet to 45 feet on properties zoned to allow housing a concern 
under Housing Accountability Act or related laws.  
Assistant City Attorney Yang replied that would be a concern if the existing height was 50 feet 
and the existing use was housing. If it existed as a commercially zoned site and they would be 
allowing housing where it was not previously allowed, then the height could be reduced.  
Mayor Stone requested Staff to find out how the height would compare to the housing 
opportunity sites within that area at 45 feet.  
Director Lait provided a slide with that information.  
Vice Mayor Lauing asked if he was correct that he heard if the building was not leased in a year 
then it could not be leased commercially again. He asked if they have a built-in office cap with 
the zoning. He addressed the statement, “Now they have a plan coming toward them without a 
component that's required by the ordinance” taken from PTC minutes from 2022.   
Director Lait answered the ordinance refers non-conforming uses to the existing chapter in the 
code related to that type of situation. When a change like this is made in the code, the code 
reads they have 10 years before the use becomes non-conforming. They need the combination 
of 10 years and 1 year of discontinuance before required to abate the use. If they were to 
project themselves out 15 or 20 years into the future and then were discontinued for a year at 
that time then the use would be abandoned. He stated they would not get a big office or 
mixed-use building because the most amount of office that can be on 1 property is 5000 square 
feet. He indicated the PTC wanted to make sure Council was aware of their concern that the 
preferred plan did not have the same level of economic analysis that was done for some of the 
other plans.  
Assistant City Attorney Yang clarified on the non-conforming use issue that it is either 10 years 
from the date of the ordinance going into effect or 1 year of discontinuance. If there was a 
period of one year where a commercial space was not leased it would be changed to a 
conforming use. 
Council Member Burt queried what happens when an applicant comes forward under the 
density bonus law to what we've just adopted or would be adopting. He asked if they came 
forward with a qualifying project under the density bonus law, 15 percent of extremely low or 
24 percent of low, they could seek or be granted exceptions to the height to the daylight plane 
by right.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
Senior Planner Cha replied for the density bonus laws to be applied, a base project would have 
to be created and the additional density increased so the additional height would be dependent 
on the additional affordable housing units the project provides. 
Director Lait explained a qualifying project that applies for state density bonus would be eligible 
for a certain number of concessions and unlimited waivers to support affordable housing. He 
added that Council gave them direction to look at expanding the El Camino Real focus area and 
they would be back before Council possibly with an amendment to the NVCAP to consider 
additional development standards in the next 12 months.  
Assistant City Attorney Yang added as part of this ordinance, the city is not adopting maximum 
densities. It's relying on FAR and other development standards to limit practical density. Under 
the density bonus, they will be able to get a percentage increase of the FAR and then will be 
able to waive other development standards, like height or daylight plane, as necessary to use 
that FAR. It is not completely unlimited development standards because it is constrained by the 
FAR and then a percentage increase on top of that. They cannot waive FAR but get a bonus 
percentage.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims asked what extent the El Camino focus area and NVCAP 
informed one another and what the arrival of the focus area 85 feet across the street would do 
to the analysis of what is appropriate from an architectural review board and PTC standpoint. It 
was her understanding they would be coming back with an amendment to NVCAP with a new 
plan for giving an alternative to a state density bonus.  
Director Lait confirmed Council Member Lythcott-Haims’ understanding to be correct. The 
amendment would consider identifying certain properties within NVCAP that would be 
appropriate to receive the standards or similar standards to what was done across the street. 
He noted that the El Camino focus area has a 20 percent inclusion area requirement whether it 
is ownership or apartments. His read of the ARB's conversation about the NVCAP relative to 
housing focus area noted the buildings across the street have 20 percent inclusionary and an 
apartment building in NVCAP could pay an in lieu fee so there may be a policy reason why they 
may not want to go so high until the El Camino Real analysis is finished to see if they could get 
more affordable units inclusionary on a development, including a rental project in the future. 
They were looking to keep it at a level that Council is comfortable with as a set of base 
standards plus density bonuses.  
Council Member Lythcott-Haims thought it would be helpful to see a projection of how many 
more units of deeply affordable housing would be predicted if the density bonus was 
hypothetically applied in certain areas the next time this was discussed. 
Director Lait advised that could be done as part of the El Camino Real extension. 
Council Member Kou noted the NVCAP density bonus was 15 percent inclusionary and the El 
Camino focus area was 20 percent inclusionary.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
Director Lait clarified apartment building developments are eligible for payment into an in-lieu 
fee. Ownership units have an inclusionary requirement of 15 percent and 2/3 of it is either at 
100 percent AMI and 1/3 of it is at 120 percent AMI. NVCAP follows the same process for the 
rest of the city. The in lieu option is the economics behind a rental prototype versus a 
condominium development that could be sold and benefit from the sale quickly and help pay 
down the investment where the rental has a longer horizon for receiving a return on that 
investment. For the housing focus area, they wanted 20 percent inclusionary regardless of 
ownership or rental. They went up to 85 feet in height and 4.0 FAR and made concessions on 
parking making it economically viable to provide the 20 percent inclusionary for apartment 
buildings. 
Council Member Kou asked if the teacher housing down the street near the motel that's coming 
up at 100 percent affordable would be 120 percent AMI and if that was part of the El Camino 
focus area.  
Director Lait replied that did not presently apply as it was not part of the El Camino Real focus 
area. That site would be looked at as part of Council's direction to study extending that 
program. The site is also located within the NVCAP project boundaries. The applicant to date 
has sought to avail himself of the planned home zoning or planned community zoning 
application process and that, by definition from Council, needs to include 20 percent 
inclusionary. That averages out to 80 percent AMI. City staff is looking at it as a PHZ application 
where there is 20 percent meeting the requirement that City Council had set forth and the 
balance of that is also affordable at roughly 120 percent AMI. 
Council Member Kou wanted to know if there was talk about waiving the development impact 
fees for projects that are coming in at a hundred percent affordable. She thought they should 
talk about development impact fees if they were considering applying this across the City at a 
later time and asked if the plan was to implement citywide under the HIP program.  
Director Lait remarked that concerned the housing incentive program which was another 
initiative they were working on and is also an alternative to state density bonus law with the 
idea to spur additional housing production. They were not looking at making adjustments to the 
development impact fees as a result of the HIP. As part of the housing element, they were 
committed to looking at development impact fees to see if they are limiting the ability to 
produce housing. 
Council Member Kou stated before moving into looking at whether they should consider 
waiving the development impact fee for any program a study should be done to see how it 
would impact the City’s funds. If they were going to produce more deep affordable there 
should be deeper discounts in terms of waiving the development impact fee.  
Director Lait commented that project was not before them at that time and with respect to the 
NVCAP, there was no reduction of development impact fees that being proposed as a part of 
the NVCAP project before them.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
Council Member Veenker mentioned Item 6.1.2 with a height up to 33 feet and asked if that 
was positing for the affordable housing piece. She wanted to understand where the report talks 
about the finding of significant unavoidable impacts related to air quality necessitating council 
agreement of a statement of overriding conditions on page 216.  
Director Lait explained that was completely within the City’s control as they would own the 
land and engage a presumably nonprofit home building. The City would set forth the parameter 
of how they want the building built. He described that as part of the 2017 Comprehensive Plan 
Process and Environmental Impact report that was prepared, there also were significant 
unavoidable impacts in those mitigation measures for air quality and so they were lifting those 
standards and applying them to this supplemental EIR.  
Natalie Noyes, Consultant, explained the supplemental EIR relied on BAAQMD's plan level 
thresholds to evaluate impacts related to criteria air pollutant emissions. She described the 
criteria that BAAQMD looks at when looking at criteria pollutant emissions at a plan level. The 
supplemental EIR found that the NVCAP would increase VMT and daily trips at a rate higher 
than the population increase and so that would have a significant criteria pollutant emission 
impact. As previously noted, they tiered off of the comprehensive plan EIR and included 
mitigation measures that were identified in the comprehensive plan EIR. This would not 
preclude future project level developments from being less than significant from criteria 
pollutant emissions by applying BAAQMD's standard best management practices. So this is just 
a plan level impact and the mitigation identified in the comprehensive plan EIR would reduce 
these impacts but wouldn't reduce it to less than significant consistent with the comprehensive 
plan EIR. 
Council Member Veenker stated the language in the proposed resolution to certify was unclear 
to her.  
Director Lait advised that the language was the same that applied in 2017. It was just being 
restated in the document. When a project is being reviewed, the air quality items and cultural 
resources impact are new and specific to NVCAP. When a project is submitted to the planning 
department for review as an entitlement process, it goes through that review and it has 
conditions that require compliance with these types of standards. We would engage the Air 
Quality Management District in that process to verify compliance. The standard is if VMT is 
reduced to a certain threshold, that's the mitigation they are trying to achieve. Most applicants 
reduce their vehicle miles traveled as a default way of meeting that threshold. He added there 
may be some components that have to be memorialized into the procedures to have it written 
down and posted but as part of the review process, they were looking for compliance with the 
comp plan mitigation measures for development and will be doing the same thing in NVCAP 
and it will be duplicative of what they have seen with the comp plan.  
Council Member Burt expressed concern about fairness on the non-conforming uses. He 
wondered why they could not increase the setback modestly as part of the upzoning.   
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
Director Lait advised that Council could consider making some adjustments to those policies 
addressing those issues. 
Director Lait and Assistant City Attorney Yang provided clarity on the AB 2097 site boundary 
analysis map. Director Lait gave guidance that the City could require the local parking 
requirements beyond AB 2097 boundary.   
Council Member Kou asked if there were mitigating steps Pepper, Olive, Fernando and Lambert 
for cut through traffic. She asked if there had been any study, counts of traffic or mitigation into 
the inside streets into Ventura. She remarked they were so focused on the NVCAP boundary 
area that they were not looking at the rest of the neighborhood and there were going to be 
impacts to the rest of the neighborhood with cut-through traffic. She hoped they would look at 
that. She was not satisfied with the supplement environmental impact report. She did not 
approve of the TDM. She had no confidence in the mitigating monitoring and reporting 
program.  
Senior Planner Cha explained the only changes they were proposing as part of the NVCAP that 
changes the direction of the travel is Ash Street between Oregon Expressway or Page Mill Road 
and Olive Avenue. They are proposing a one-way street so there would be no cut-through 
traffic into the NVCAP area but all other streets would continue to be two-way. She stated it 
was outside of the NVCAP boundary so they may have some cumulative intersection they 
studied as part of the traffic study.   
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Lauing moved, seconded by Mayor Stone to: 
1. Adopt a Resolution (Attachment A) implementing the NVCAP and approving associated 
environmental work, including: 
a. Certify the Supplemental Environmental Impact Report (SEIR) 
b. Make the findings required by California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), 
including a Statement of Overriding Considerations 
c. Adopt the Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program 
d. Adopt the NVCAP and amend the 2030 Comprehensive Plan 
2. Introduce an Ordinance (Attachment B) to: 
a. Adopt a new Chapter 18.29 (North Ventura (NV) District Regulations) in the Palo 
Alto Municipal Code and make other amendments to Title 18 (Zoning) to\ 
implement the NVCAP 
b. Amend Chapter 16.65 (Citywide Affordable Housing Requirements) 
c. Amend the Zoning District Map and re-zone parcels within the NVCAP area 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 19 
City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  08/05/2024 
3. Direct staff to: 
A) Amend the ordinance and NVCAP to require parking in compliance with PAMC 
18.52 and 18.54 for areas beyond the boundary of AB 2097. 
B) Amend the proposed ordinance section 18.29.100 to allow a nonconforming use 
to be discontinued for up to two years of instead of one year as set forth in 
PAMC 18.70. 
C) To the extent allowed by State Law require EV and ADA parking spaces within 
the NVCAP boundaries. 
D) Apply a 15-foot setback from Park Boulevard on either side of the street. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1, Kou 
10. 
Designation of Voting Delegate and Alternate for the League of California Cities Annual 
2024 Conference, to be held October 16-18, 2024, in Long Beach, California 
MOTION:  Council Member Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Lythcott-Haims to 
designate Council member Veenker to be the voting delegate and Council Member Kou as the 
alternate. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:24 P.M. 
