CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 21 
Special & Regular Meeting 
 
September 12, 2022 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present:  
 
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Present Virtually:  
None  
Absent: 
 
None 
  
Special Orders of the Day 
2. 
Appreciation for Congresswoman Anna G. Eshoo, United States 
Representative 
of 
California’s 
18thCongressional 
District, 
for 
advocating for the Historic Inflation Reduction Act and for securing $7 
million for a variety of projects through Community Project Funding to 
support Palo Alto  
Action: Appreciation Given 
Mayor Burt discussed that Congresswoman Eshoo has supported Palo Alto 
priorities with great success, including securing community project funding 
for the Palo Alto Museum and for an alternative response mental health crisis 
program, and helping the Valley Transportation Authority get funding for 
grade separation planning.  He expressed appreciation for her ongoing 
support for Caltrain moving forward on necessary grade separation projects 
as well as the Infrastructure Funding Act and Inflation Reduction Act.   
Congresswoman Anna Eshoo offered thanks and spoke about the community 
funding projects.  She was thrilled that the dollars were going to make a 
difference in the community and praised the City Council for their 
participation.  She discussed changes in legislation that allow Medicare to 
negotiate the price of prescription drugs to reduce out-of-pocket costs, cap 
the price of insulin for Medicare beneficiaries, and lower the cost of 
healthcare premiums.  She commended the Council for their efforts in 
climate change and discussed additional related legislation changes.  She 
was pleased about progress related to grade separation.  She stressed the 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
importance of partnerships in order to be successful and thanked the Council 
for their service.   
Council Member Stone expressed his appreciation and gratitude to 
Congresswoman Eshoo for everything she has done for the city.   
Council Member DuBois thanked Congresswoman Eshoo for representing the 
City so well and especially for the funding toward the history museum.   
1. 
Appointment of Candidates for the Human Relations Commission 
ORIGINAL MOTION: Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council 
Member Stone to eliminate the lowest number of votes if there is no 
majority selected on the previous round.  
SUBSTITUTE MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved seconded 
by Council Member Tanaka, when voting on the second round, there is 
N+1 candidates moving forward when there is not a majority selection 
the first round.  
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILS: 2-5, Filseth, Burt, Stone, Kou, DuBois 
no 
ORIGINAL MOTION PASSES:  7-0 
First round of voting for one position on the Human Relations 
Commission with term ending March 31, 2023 voting for:   
Donald Bar:  
 
 
Burt 
Tracy Alejandra Navichoque:  Cormack, Stone, DuBois, Kou   
Chitra Sharma:   
Filseth  
 
 
Kat Snyder:  
 
 
Tanaka 
 
 
Tracy Alejandra Navichoque with 4 votes was appointed to the 
Human Relations Commission with a term ending March 31, 
2023. 
Mayor Burt stated that the Clerk had raised a procedural issue that if 
there was not a majority for a candidate on the first ballot, the 
candidate(s) with the lowest number of votes would be dropped for the 
second and subsequent rounds.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
Council Member Cormack made a substitute motion to move N+1 
candidates forward during the second round if there were not sufficient 
votes to appoint someone in the first round.   
 
Study Session 
3. 
Report and Discussion on Valley Water’s Purified Water Project 
Including Location of the Advanced Water Purification Facility at the 
Former Los Altos Treatment Plant Site, Reverse Osmosis Concentrate 
Management, Upcoming Agreements and Decisions  
Action: No Action Taken 
 
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston stated the study session was intended 
to give an update on the work since the approval in 2019 of the partnership 
agreement to advance resilient water reuse programs. 
Gary Cremin, Valley Water Board Chair, discussed the drought emergency in 
the state and looked forward to improving the agreement with Palo Alto and 
Mountain View.  He reviewed the environmental and financial benefits of 
recycling and purifying water.  He discussed the grants available for salt 
removal/conservation and wastewater removal.  They will fund staff to work 
on the project and give Palo Alto and Mountain View the right to get 
additional water supply.  He would like to come up with plan to get more 
money to cover some other challenges.   
Mountain View Council Member Pat Showalter stated that what happens at 
the plant matters to Mountain View as well as Palo Alto.  She discussed the 
use of recycled water and the recycled water use required by building codes 
in Mountain View.  The quality of the recycled water has not been as good as 
hoped and combining the water from the planned plant will allow a very 
high-caliber product.   
Kirsten Struve, Assistant Officer, Water Supply Division, Valley Water, 
discussed the project's benefits for water supply and sustainability as well as 
specific benefits to Palo Alto and Mountain View, including support for the 
salt removal facility, other financial benefits and helping meet sustainability 
goals.  She discussed the impacts of droughts and land subsidence when 
groundwater is over-pumped and the importance of continuing to develop 
locally controlled water supplies, including recycled and purified water.  The 
advanced purification center in San Jose uses microfiltration, reverse 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
osmosis, and ultraviolet disinfection to purify water.  The same technology 
will be used for this project.  The proposed site is the former Los Altos 
Treatment Plant site at the end of San Antonio Road.  She believed the 
project was compatible with the recent Home Key Project grant.  A draft 
Environmental Impact Report is nearly complete and evaluates the proposed 
project's 
environmental 
conditions, 
range 
of 
alternatives, 
potential 
environmental impacts with implementation and also provides mitigation 
measures.  Outreach efforts are ongoing.  The proposed project will utilize a 
public-private partnership model to use private sector innovation and 
financing while Valley Water retains ownership of the project.  The price tag 
is over $700 million.  It is critical to the financial viability to finalize the 
provisions outlined in the 2019 agreement for the land lease of the site and 
the reverse osmosis concentrate discharge.  The lease agreement and 
operations and maintenance agreements will be presented to the Council for 
consideration soon.   
Assistant Public Works Director Karin North showed a slide detailing the 
variety of projects in the works and limited staffing available to complete the 
projects.  She showed an aerial view of the water quality control plant 
showing the local salt removal facility and the future pumping plant for the 
larger-scale regional purification facility.  A previously completed EIR 
determined the need to remove salt and improve the quality of the recycled 
water.  Staff is working on a design for the local salt removal facility.  The 
Valley Water Purified Water Project is proposed to be located at the LATP site 
adjacent to the Home Key Project.  She discussed the responsibilities of 
Valley Water versus Palo Alto versus Mountain View.   
Council Member Cormack requested staff to explain several questions for the 
students present.  She stated that $33 million on a $20 million base was a 
shock and clarified that the approximately $19 million was money that Palo 
Alto and Mountain View property owners have already paid and that Valley 
Water is retaining to be spent on a project like this and other ways that this 
might be used.  She questioned any changes since 2019 and how many 
people this project would require.    
Mayor Burt clarified the difference between the $18.4 million in the 
agreement and the $18.94 million, the guiding Principal 5 funding, which is 
related but outside of the agreement.  Discussion about the use of that 
ensued.  He questioned the additional cost of adding the oxidation process to 
the facility at Embarcadero and whether there would be space to do so.  
Assistant Director North stated the current facility was not looking at adding 
the oxidation step and that would require a change in design, which is 
already at about 90% design.  Mayor Burt asked if staff had been reviewing 
the prospect of some portion of the Measure E land returning to the voters 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
to be allowed for needed purposes and the balance going into park land.  
Director Eggleston stated the current biosolids facility plan does not 
currently contemplate those uses on that site.  Mayor Burt commented that 
he would like to reserve land for uses like advanced purification through 
oxidation and/or an additional technology like biowaste biochar.  He 
questioned the plans related to potential sea level rise.  He wanted to make 
sure not to lock in plans that will not allow adapting to new higher 
standards.  He questioned if a public-private model was also considered for 
the plant on Embarcadero.  Staff had not looked at the possibility.   
Council Member DuBois had questions about how much the sea level rise 
contributed to the increase in cost, why the contingency is so large, if there 
is new funding available through the Inflation Reduction Act, how the RO 
concentrate would be pumped back to the regional plant, and the possibility 
of combining the 2 plants.  Staff discussed these questions.   
Council Member Stone continues to be concerned about the sea level rise 
impact.  He asked if there had been discussion with Valley Water to see if 
they would increase their share of funding for the project to make it 
proportional to current inflation-related costs.  He stated there were still a 
lot of unanswered questions and other ideas to be pursued further.  He 
stressed evaluating the impacts on Project Home Key as they would on any 
other housing project.   
Council Member Tanaka asked for a breakdown of different funding sources, 
how the costs are allocated between the different parties, and the operating 
costs.  There was further discussion about the involved costs.  He had 
questions about the rationale behind the majority of the tax split coming 
down on Palo Alto and about how the options for using the recycled water 
work.  Staff discussed these questions.  He suggested doing a fair market 
rent for this.  He questioned the impact of Home Key on this project and any 
increased costs related to that.   
Council Member Filseth questioned the confidence in the $53 million since it 
had increased from $20 million over several years.  Staff stated that it was 
based on nearly a complete design with conservative cost escalation based 
on current market conditions; not all factors were included in the original 
estimate.  Council Member Filseth stated the real value of the treated water 
appeared to be not just removing the salt but after the next step and 
questioned whether more investments would be required to derive 
significant value from that.  He stated it is hard to make these decisions 
early in the process without accurate numbers.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
Mayor Burt questioned the intended use of Palo Alto's share of the water 
from the $52 million plant.  Assistant Director North stated it is to use a 
higher quality of treated recycled water to be used on the greens at the Palo 
Alto Golf Course.  Mayor Burt questioned the intention on how the business 
model will work, the difference between what it costs to produce the water 
versus paying for it, and which entity will get that difference.  He would like 
to have these issues worked out when this returns for action.  There has 
been discussion about whether this should be 2 projects or 1, and he asked 
about the process by which a decision will be made on that.  He believed 
that combining the projects would reduce the capital costs.   
Vice Mayor Kou was concerned about the potential for costs to continue to 
rise the longer it takes and looked forward to seeing the business plan.   
Public Comments:  
1. 
Rebecca Eisenberg (in person) expressed gratitude for the work done 
by staff on fleshing out this program.  She believed this type of 
sustainable programs needed to be prioritized and paid for on the part 
of the water district, which could be accomplished through the IRA and 
IA as well as defunding environmentally hazardous projects, such as 
the Pacheco Dam Expansion.  She supported investment in these 
infrastructure projects, and because President Biden and Governor 
Newsome also have put water projects front and center, she was 
optimistic that more money would become available.  She believed 
that Santa Clara County should be doing better than below the 
national average of 10% for water recycling. 
2. 
Eileen McLaughlin, representing the Citizens Committee to Complete 
the Refuge, supported the need for recycled water and appreciated the 
work going into it.  Related to the sea level concern, she stated the 
Los Altos Treatment Plan site and Home Key site are considered tidal 
marsh migration space, space where the marshes could grow into this 
land as water rose and give further protection inland.  With Valley 
Water building there, that will not happen.  The City needs to mitigate 
the loss of that potential, and she recommended including a wetland 
connection between Harbor Marsh and the Emily Renzel Wetlands to 
help assure the health and use of this wetland.    
3. 
Winter Dellenbach commented that seawater rise goes hand in hand 
with groundwater rise and that no mention has been made of 
groundwater rise, which needs to be considered and included in further 
studies.  She agreed with Ms. McLaughlin's suggestion for marshland 
mitigation.  She commented that she understood that salt and other 
minerals and waste would be removed from the water but questioned 
if there would be an increase of salt discharge and minerals into the 
bay or if it would be taken out at the waste treatment plant.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
4. 
Rani Fischer, representing the Santa Clara Audubon Society, had 
concerns about the location of the water purification facility at the 
termination of San Antonio.  Restorable bay wetlands are critical to 
adaptation to sea level rise and critically important to bird life and 
biodiversity, and she also concurred with Ms. McLaughlin.  She asked 
that a significant and meaningful investment in bay wetland habitat 
restoration in Palo Alto be included in the project and any grant 
application.   
5. 
Aram James appreciated the complex discussion and was excited that 
Ms. Eisenberg was running for Valley Water District #7.  He suggested 
visiting 
Ms. 
Eisenberg's 
website, 
rebecca@rebeccaforwater.com, 
contributing to her campaign and speaking at City Council meetings on 
her behalf.   
 
The Council Took a break from 7:05 to 7:15 P.M. The City Council adjourned 
the Special Meeting and called to order the City Council Regular meeting at 
7:15 P.M. 
 
4. 
70 Encina Avenue (22PLN-00198): Request for a Prescreening to 
Consider Rezoning the Subject Property From Community Commercial 
(CC) to Planned Community (PC/PHZ) to Allow Development of a 
Building With Approximately 20 Dwelling Units and 28 Parking Spaces. 
Environmental Assessment: Not a Project. The Formal Application Will 
be Subject to California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Review. 
Zoning District: CC (Community Commercial).  
Action: No Action Taken 
 
Emily Foley, Planner, stated this application is for prescreening, which is 
required for legislative changes, in this case a rezoning to the PHZ zone.  
The purpose is to get some early feedback.  She reminded the Council that 
they were not looking for a firm opinion on support or opposition at this 
time.  The conceptual project is to rezone 2 Community Commercial zoned 
properties, currently part of the Town and Country parking lot, to be rezoned 
to Planned Home Zoning/Planned Community to allow for construction of 20 
residential condominium units (12 one-bedroom and 8 two-bedroom).  A 
Certificate of Compliance would be required to merge the 2 individual lots 
into 1 larger lot.  PHZ cannot add more jobs than housing units, which is not 
anticipated here since it is 100% housing with no commercial component.  
The other requirement is at least 20% affordable units to a variety of income 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
levels.  Four units would be affordable, but the distribution of income is to be 
determined.  The project would be on a lot 100 feet wide and 120 feet deep 
on Encina Avenue and meet the parking requirement.  Each unit is proposed 
to have a balcony as its available outdoor space.  The proposed structure is 
55 feet tall and 5 stories; the typical zoning allows a structure up to 50 feet.  
This property is within the Town and Country Shopping Center, although not 
owned by Town and Country.  Per the base zoning, housing is limited to 
15% floor area, which is one of the reasons the applicant is interested in 
pursuing a PHZ.  Since the existing use until recently was parking, there 
would not be conversion of retail to housing.  A cursory review of the new 
objective design standards was completed.  The project deviates from these 
standards in that it proposes ground-level as opposed to underground 
parking.  It also does not comply with the contextual setbacks in daylight 
plane or the requirements for building modulation.  Staff recommends that 
Council conduct a prescreening and provide informal comments regarding 
the rezoning to the text amendment necessary to move forward with a PHZ 
proposal.   
Applicant Ken Hayes, Hayes Group Architects, spoke about his client Ed 
Storm with Storm Land, LLC, as an experienced developer in the San 
Francisco Bay area and Northern California.  Palo Alto targets over 6000 
housing units in the next 9 years, over 650 units per year.  The PHZ is a 
great start but solutions presented always seem to be too tall, too close to 
R1 zones, too remote to transit, too dense, and under-parked.  With no R1 
zones nearby, several 50-foot neighboring buildings, and plenty of 
amenities, this is a logical site for higher-density housing opportunities and 
the employment of the PHZ zone.  
Applicant Jeffry Galbraith, Hayes Group Architects, discussed that this 
project is different from many applications over the last 2 years.  He 
demonstrated the zoning map showing the property surrounded on 3 sides 
by CC zoned properties and all of the lots across the street on the north of 
Encina are all CS zoned with the exception of the Opportuinty Center.  There 
are no R1 parcels within 150 feet of the site.  The proposed program is 
100% residential project with a mix of 20 one- and two-bedroom condos and 
20% affordable per the PHZ requirements.  Mr. Galbraith discussed the 
setbacks and the 5-foot planted buffer between the parking lot and 
sidewalks.  The lobby is located on the most visible corner of the project, 
and there is as much greenery in the front as possible.  Most of the ground 
floor is for parking, bike storage, and utilities and there is trash access 
concealed through the façade as well as a secondary stair.  He described the 
configuration of the building and showed 2-dimensional renderings.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
Council Member Filseth questioned if this site is in the housing inventory and 
asked how high the Opportunity Center is.  Planning and Transportation 
Director Lait responded that at 5 stories, it would be close to 50 feet. 
Council Member DuBois asked if PHZ was necessary or if they could convert 
the commercial to residential use.  There was no analysis of this completed 
yet.  He questioned if the elevator tower was included in the height.  The 
code provides for 15 feet above the height limit, and the elevator tower is 
effectively mechanical equipment, which is included in that exception.  
Council Member DuBois asked if there is a daylight plane against commercial 
properties, and there was discussion on that.  He asked if the project met 
the open space requirements, and the building would meet both the 
common space and per-unit private space requirements.   
Council Member Stone asked for clarification that the proposed conversion is 
not prohibited at Town and Country because it is not conversion of retail 
space but of parking.  Planning and Transportation Director Lait stated the 
finding may ultimately rest with the Council, but the staff's initial review 
found this was not conversion of retail or commercial space as this replaces 
surface parking.  There was further discussion of these considerations.  
Council Member Stone discussed whether the 4 BMR units would be a mix of 
1- and 2-bedroom apartments.   
Mayor Burt asked if the selection of income level options for affordable 
housing in PHZ was at the discretion of applicant or something the City can 
tie to the level of up-zoning benefit.  He stated he would welcome 
clarification from the Council.  He believed Encina was a good place for 
housing and appropriate for density.  The concerns he had for this project 
were around setbacks and modulation.  He believed this was an area to 
consider embracing housing but also wanted to respect the unique character 
of Town and Country.   
Vice Mayor Kou agreed that this appears to be a good location for housing.  
She wanted to see deeper affordability with the extra height of this project if 
PHZ was granted.  She wanted there to be loading and unloading that did 
not take away from ingress and egress of Town and Country as well as 
Encina.  She was concerned that the residential units might end up being 
Airbnbs versus actual people living there.  Town and Country has parking 
issues already and taking parking away is not supportive of economy 
recovery or wellbeing.   
 
Public comments 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
1. Dean Rubinson (in person), Director of Development for Ellis Partners, 
which has owned and operated Town and Country Village since 2005, 
stated they have gone to great lengths to preserve and celebrate its 
historic character and have worked extensively with the City on the 
improvements undertaken.  He stated they have never tried to 
maximize development potential of the site out of respect.  Given the 
history of the site, they are concerned about the proposed project.  
Placing an isolated, 5-story, 55-foot development on a quarter-acre 
site that might measure to 70 with mechanical and elevator equipment 
is wholly out of context for a site adjacent to a historic and primarily 
single-story structure.  He demonstrated renderings of potentially 
more harmonious 2- or 3-story options versus the proposed 5-story 
building.   
2. Melinda Ellis Evers (in person), Co-Founder and Managing Principal of 
Ellis Partners, stated Ellis Partners is very supportive of housing 
throughout the Bay Area and on this Encina site and would support a 
thoughtfully designed project at this location.  She believed what is 
currently proposed is too tall and too dense.  She asked for 
considerations in reducing the height and mass, improving the 
aesthetics to better integrate with the surrounding context, and 
changing to underground parking.  She believed it was an unfair 
impact on Town and Country and that a reduction to a 2- or 3-story 
project was a reasonable approach.   
3. Roger Smith (in person) was concerned about the proposed 5-story 
project of up to 70 feet with mechanical.  It does not align with Palo 
Alto's standards for development.  He supported new housing but 
proposed projects need to fit in with the character of the surrounding 
area.  If the project moves forward, he would like to see a reduction of 
the height, an improved building design, and a better plan for the first 
floor of something more than just parking.   
4. Rebecca Eisenberg (in person) believed the proposal was amazing and 
found it hard to imagine a more sustainable option than transforming a 
parking lot to housing.  She pointed out that environmentalists and 
scientists agree that building up is preferable to building out.  She felt 
it was absurd to expect property developers to decrease from 20 to 10 
units in the building as it would not be profitable.  Ms. Eisenberg 
stated this would fit in on that street and would be more in line with 
buildings on Encina than at Town and Country.  This was one of the 
few home ownership opportunities before the Council in a long time, 
and this project should be embraced.   
5. Aram James supported this project and believed it was realistic to go 
between 7 and 10 floors to enable not just below market rate but very 
low-income units.  The additional tenants would give business to Town 
and Country.  He would like to see murals painted on the side facing 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
Town and Country and a garden park on top of the complex.  He felt it 
was a win-win for the community but felt the developer should do 
more.   
6. Winter Dellenbach stated this is a heat island and that this project 
could be the poster child for how not to design a residential building on 
a heat island.  There is an overhang on the top floor and none below 
that, reflective glass, metal decoration.  The air conditioning will be 
going 24/7, and she felt there was no consideration of how hot this 
site would be.  She stated she was not against a housing development 
in this area but felt a better design was needed. 
7. Evelyn Shen (in person) stated she was in favor of the general idea 
and that it was better environmentally to build up than out.  She felt it 
was more important to conserve the environment than the aesthetic of 
the surroundings and that this project may support Town and Country 
by bringing in more revenue.   
Council Member Filseth discussed that Ellis Partners had brought in a lot 
more people and shops to Town and Country than there were before.  He felt 
this was a reasonable location for housing for all the reasons mentioned and 
that if Ellis Partners were in support of it, he would have no concerns.  He 
would like to have consensus between the applicant and Ellis Partners.   
Council Member Tanaka liked that the project was fully parked but felt the 
ground floor would be better used for retail.  He suggested smaller units to 
reduce the amount of square footage and agreed that collaboration with 
Town and Country would be important.   
Council Member DuBois agreed that this was a good location for density and 
was generally supportive of the project.  He suggested going 5 feet 
underground with partially submerged parking to keep the height at 50 
rather than 55 feet and that keeping the look and feel of Town and Country 
would help it fit in better.  He believed the City would have to consider 
adding density in a commercial site like this.   
Council Member Cormack stated that the concerns from Ellis Partners were 
more aesthetic than financial.  She had no concern about people seeing 
parked cars on the first floor since this would be replacing a parking lot.  She 
believed there would be demand for these units and disagreed with making 
the units smaller.   
5. 
4333 and 4345 El Camino Real [22PLN-00210]:  Request by Toll Bros. 
for Prescreening of Their Proposal to Rezone the Subject Properties 
from CS to PHZ to Allow Redevelop the Two Sites with 12 Dwelling 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
Units and 55 Dwelling Units, Respectively. Environmental Assessment: 
Not a Project. (7:30 – 8:30 PM) 
Action: No Action Taken 
Claire Raybould, Planning, stated a prescreening is required for legislative 
changes, including rezoning, and is intended to solicit early feedback and 
cannot result in any formal action.  She reminded the Council to refrain from 
forming firm opinions supporting or opposing the project.  This a 
prescreening to change 2 CS-zoned properties to change them to PHZ to 
allow construction of 12 units on one site and 55 condominium units in the 
other.  This would replace 6500 square feet of retail and personal service 
space as well as 18,000 square feet of hotel space.  The net loss of revenue 
would be roughly $100,000 to $200,000; there would be an additional 1% 
property tax for the new development.  The project would meet basic 
requirements, including at least 20% below market rate, and no net increase 
in jobs.  They are proposing 6 ADUs; code currently allows 1 new ADU per 
site.  Site B proposes a height of 60 feet for most of the development, 69 
feet for the elevator and rooftop access.  Neither site proposes to replace 
retail.  Some of the mature trees are proposed to be removed, and it is 
presumed that a number of the trees are considered protected.  Staff 
recommends the Council conduct a prescreening and provide informal 
comments regarding this proposal.   
Applicant Nick Kosla, Toll Brothers, described similar projects taking place 
nearby.  He discussed different aspects of the project, including the benefits 
of adding ADUs along with townhomes.  There are 1-, 2-, and 3-bedroom 
units from approximately 800 to 1800 square feet.  The plan allowed for 
saving as many existing trees as possible and would include planting new 
trees.   
Council Member DuBois asked about the height of adjacent properties and 
how far this is from the R20 zone.  He questioned the air rights for the 
condos. 
Council Member Cormack clarified that it is an actual ADU with a separate 
entrance and not a JADU.   
Council Member Stone questioned if there are locations along El Camino for 
residents to place trash for pickup and whether it would create traffic or 
aesthetic problems.  Staff would review this to find a solution that was least 
impactful for vehicular traffic.  Council Member Stone asked about loading 
spaces for either site and the height without the rooftop deck. 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
Mayor Burt questioned the applicant on the choice of ADUs rather than 
separate units with separate ownership; the applicant stated it would mean 
selling microunits of 400 square feet, which they do not do.  Mayor Burt was 
interested in hearing from colleagues about potentially accepting a higher 
FAR in exchange for standalone units.   
Vice Mayor Kou questioned TOT revenues from the current hotel. 
Public Comments 
1. Bob Moss (in person) felt there were a lot of problems with this 
proposal.  He believed the project should be scaled back to meet the 
55-foot height limit, meet the 0.6 FAR, have adequate onsite parking, 
and have landscaping.   
2. Aram James believed building up to 7 or 8 floors was realistic to be 
able to house people.  He suggested going up to 60 feet here and 
going higher on the previously discussed property would allow more 
units that could be very low-income housing.   
3. Rebecca Eisenberg (in person) stated that housing adds to quality of 
life, adds to stability of the neighborhoods, helps public schools.  It is 
not an option to force hotel owners to stay in business if they are 
interested in selling.  Replacing it with housing is better in the public 
interest than replacing with commercial office use.  She disagreed that 
trees would be able to be transplanted and preferred to see older trees 
preserved. 
Council Member Cormack believed the concept of the ADU bringing in rental 
income opened homeownership to a different group.  She preferred the 
larger building include some type of retail that would be an amenity for 
residents.  She was generally supportive of the project.   
Council Member Stone believed this was a good location for housing but 
agreed that including retail on site B would be a good opportunity.  He was 
not concerned about the building height and felt it fit in with surrounding 
buildings but felt that preserving the trees was important.  He stated that 
having an area for loading and deliveries would be important for a building 
this size.   
Council Member DuBois suggested combining the 2 sites into a single 
condition association, consider dropping the ADUs and adding more units, 
and considering reducing the height.   
Council Member Kou felt there were problems with removing mature trees, 
the potential loss of revenue for TOT, and the height.  She was concerned 
about the traffic on El Camino and Cesano Court.  She suggested on site 
being developed as a park for more open space in the area.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
Council Member Filesth thought the project was fine.   
Mayor Burt clarified the height of the building and whether the street was 
being used to calculate FAR.  He preferred providing additional separate 
units to ADUs. 
Council Member Tanaka liked the location but agreed adding retail would be 
good in this area.  He liked smaller, more affordable units and also the 
flexibility of ADUs. 
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
No additional comments beyond the amended agenda.  
Public Comment  
 
1. Reshma Valame (in person) and Mathew Tsien (in person) spoke about 
mental health at the high school level.  Mr. Tsien stated that the 
lockdowns of 2020 have caused a wave of apathy amongst high school 
students in Palo Alto.  Ms. Valame stated that community is an 
important way to affect mental health and kids of high school age are 
not considered when planning and organizing city events.  Mr. Tsien 
added that making it clear to these kids that they have a community 
that supports them can make a big impact.   
2. Aram James stated he received a rejection for his request for the 
camera footage of the canine attack on October 10, 2021, involving 
Palo Alto dog handler Nick Enberg.  He stated that it feels like a 
coverup.  He also discussed tasers and requested the cost of having 
tasers each year for the last 5 years to get idea of whether it is worth 
keeping tasers in the City.   
3. Ken Horowitz (in person) was looking forward to hearing what the 
candidates plan to do about Cubberley Community Center.  He 
questioned if there would be a meeting on Monday, September 26, on 
the first night of Rosh Hashanah and suggested moving it to that 
Tuesdays after sundown.   
4. Rebecca Eisenberg (in person) spoke about the UN's 17 sustainable 
development goals and suggested having a youth representative on 
the City Council.   
5. Katie Reuff thanked the City Council for their support on the National 
Day of Service.  She stated she was lucky to work with various groups 
and leaders to plan a service event at Cooley Landing in East Palo Alto, 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
bringing together volunteers to pick up trash and learn about the 
significance of the site.   
6. Toni Minion, member of the Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition, stated 
that Palo Alto is behind on climate action.  More programs like the 
water pump heater initiative are needed.   
7. Mora Oommen, Executive Director of Youth Community Service, 
thanked those who volunteered for the National Day of Service and 
discussed this event.   
8. Julia Zeitlin, Co-Founder of the Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition, 
spoke about the environmental and public health issues posed by gas 
stoves and supported the electrification of gas stoves.   
 
Consent Calendar 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 7 
Council Member Cormack, DuBois registered a no vote on Agenda Item 
Number 9. 
Council Member Stone, DuBois, Tanaka requested to pull item 11.  
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 6-10, 12 and 13 and pull Item 11 for 
discussion. 
 
6. 
Approve Minutes from the August 8, 2022 , August 10, 2022, August 
15, 2022, and the August 22, 2022 City Council Meetings 
7. 
Approval of Amendment Number 1 to Contract Number C20177684 
with SCA for Street Sweeping Services, for Modification and Increase 
of Contract by $1,080,674 to Include Prevailing Wages for a Revised 
Not to Exceed amount of $6,688,906 for the Remaining Three Years of 
a Five-Year Contract; and Approval of Budget Amendment in the 
Refuse Fund 
8. 
Adoption of the Amended Community Development Block Grant 
(CDBG) Citizen Participation Plan 
9. 
Adoption of Resolution 10069 Authorizing Use of Teleconferencing 
for Council Meetings During Covid-19 State of Emergency 
10. 
Adoption of Park Improvement Ordinance for Renovation of the 
Mitchell Park Dog Park as Recommended by the Parks and Recreation 
Commission 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
11. 
Recommendation from the Human Relations Commission on the 
naming of the holiday on the second Monday in October (Pulled for 
discussion) 
12. 
Approval of Contract No. C23183740 with StreetSense CA, LLC for 
Economic Development Consulting Services for a Term Expiring 
December 31, 2025 and a Total Amount Not-to-Exceed $261,995; and 
Approval of a Budget Amendment in the General Fund 
13. 
QUASI-JUDICIAL. 215/217 Alma Street {22PLN-00164}: Ratification of 
Director's Approval of Waiver From the Retail Preservation Ordinance 
for an Alternative Viable Use to Allow for an Animal Care Provider 
(Modern Animal) to Occupy a 4,200 Square Foot Portion of the Site. 
Zone District: Commercial Downtown Neighborhood with a Pedestrian 
Combining District (CD-N[P]). Environmental Assessment: Exempt 
from CEQA in Accordance With Guidelines Section 15061(b)(3) and 
15301. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING 
ITEM 6, 8, 10, 12 and 13 MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
ITEM 7 MOTION PASSED:  6-1, Tanaka no 
ITEM 9 MOTION PASSED:  5-2, Cormack, DuBois no 
 
Public Comments 
1. 
Floyd Neesen (in person) discussed history related to Christopher 
Columbus and believed that his name should not be used for the 
holiday on the second Monday in October.   
2. 
Sophia Howell (in person) also discussed history related to Christopher 
Columbus and suggested that the date in question should be 
recognized exclusively as Indigenous People's Day. 
3. 
Rebecca Eisenberg (in person) agreed with the previous comments 
regarding the naming of the holiday and stated it was illogical to 
celebrate both Columbus Day and Indigenous People's Day.   
4. 
Aram James agreed with previous comments about not coupling 
Indigenous People's Day and Columbus Day and also spoke about 
celebrating Frederick Douglas rather than Independence Day each 
July.   
 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
Council Member Cormack stated she still cannot make the findings for item 
9. 
Council Member Dubois stated he no longer thinks there is an emergency. 
Council Member Tanaka stated he voted no on item 7 because there is a 
substantial increase beyond the rate of inflation and takes away money 
reserved for emergencies.  He believed the Council needed to start saying no 
to things in order to stay within budget.   
 
City Manager Comments 
 
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, gave an update on COVID and the availability of 
the bivalent booster and isolation procedures.  He acknowledged the 
significant power outages over the last week and appreciated the 
community's patience with the issues.  He discussed the use of Twitter and 
the City's webpage as a means of providing information on outages.  He also 
noted the City's recent blog on additional information related to the 340 
Portage Avenue site and steps looking forward.  The upcoming California 
Avenue Farmer's Market will include an event entitled Small Gestures as part 
of the ongoing ArtLift Program.  City Manager Shikada discussed an 
upcoming event at the Junior Museum and Zoo open exclusively to families 
with children with disabilities on Sunday, September 18.  An upcoming 
Council item for a prescreening on series of addresses on El Camino Real at 
the Creekside Inn Side will be deferred until October 17.  Much of the 
meeting in 2 weeks will be dedicated the Sustainability and Climate Action 
Plan, also with potential for Council positions on ballot measures to be 
discussed and a series of upcoming items relating to sustainability and 
climate action.   
 
Action Items 
14. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of a Resolution Confirming the Weed 
Abatement Report and Ordering the Cost of Abatement to be a Special 
Assessment on the Respective Properties Described Therein  
 
MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council 
Member Burt to adopt Resolution 10070 confirming the report and 
ordering abatement costs to be a special assessment on the properties 
specified in the report.  
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Fire Chief Geo Blackshire stated there is a contract with the county who runs 
the weed abatement program.  First the Council adopts a resolution saying 
that weeds are a nuisance and then the County does an assessment of 
properties and the fines that would be allocated if not resolved in the 
determined time period.   
Mayor Burt asked Staff to respond to some of the concerns expressed in 
emails from the public.   
Fire Chief Blackshire discussed questions about whether there was a hazard, 
the time frame, and the process.  Typically there was a commencement 
report and an assessment report, and in 2021, the timeline did not reflect 
when the fines were applied and came across as if the fines were a late fee.   
Moe Kumre, County Weed Abatement Manager, stated that last year the City 
Council had a commencement hearing, declared weeds a public nuisance, 
and authorized the department to inspect and correct any properties in 
which the owners failed o meet the compliance standards.  The hearing was 
missed last year and the cost recovery fees for last year and this had to be 
rolled into this year's hearing.  The fees were for inspections done 
properties, 
work 
orders, 
and 
contractors' 
charges 
plus 
a 
county 
administrative fee.  Mr. Kumre was prepared to answer the specifics of any 
properties as necessary.   
Public Comments 
1. Kate Bellairs asked if there is an appeals process for fine assessment 
regarding a property that is under construction. 
2. Aram James discussed an unoccupied property on Los Robles that is 
very overgrown and seems to be a fire hazard.  He also wondered if 
there was a way for the City to provide free counsel to assist in 
resolving these issues without accumulating a fine that may result 
situations like a low-income resident becoming unhoused.   
Council Member Cormack questioned if the inspectors take photos and 
whether that is available to the property owners.  Mr. Kumre stated that 
pictures are taken by the inspectors as well as by any contractors 
performing abatement work, and the property owners may see those photos 
by request.  Council Member Cormack questioned how long owners remain 
on the list and how it affects new owners.  Mr. Kumre stated they remain on 
the list until they show 3 consecutive years of voluntary compliance and 
typically the program follows the property and not the owner.  A new owner 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
may let the department know they have taken mitigating actions and 
potentially be removed from the program. 
 
15. 
Adoption of an Ordinance Approving the Police Department's Military 
Equipment Use Policy Under AB 481  
 
MOTION:  Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member DuBois to 
adopt the draft ordinance approving the Palo Alto Police Department 
Military Equipment Use Policy in accordance with AB 481. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Police Chief Andrew Binder discussed that AB 481 was enacted January 1, 
2022, and requires the ordinance be implemented by November 1, 2022.  
The spirit of the bill is to increase community awareness surrounding local 
police agencies' possession of certain types of specialized equipment.  This 
requires City Council to adopt a use policy that contains equipment 
inventory, authorizes uses, fiscal impacts, rules for use training, and 
compliance measures and requires reauthorization every year.  Police Chief 
Binders stated they were not seeking to acquire any new equipment.  He 
listed the equipment affected.  He was also seeking to use allied agency 
equipment if necessary.   
Council Member Cormack inquired if tasers are included; they were not 
required to be listed.  She asked for a description of the 37-mm less lethal 
launcher and kinetic energy munition.   
Police Acting Captain James Reifschneider described that the equipment is 
referred to as a Sage and fires a rubber round.  It is designed to be used 
against armed subjects, specifically armed with other than a firearm, like a 
knife or a bat.   
Council Member Stone inquired if there had been any incidents in the past 
year in which an officer pulled an AR-15 out of a vehicle.  There was 
discussion about the uses of various types of equipment.   
Council Member Tanaka questioned what happens if there is an incident that 
something more is needed.   
Acting Captain Reifschneider stated that the statute requires they disclose 
not only what they have but what they could reasonably anticipate needing.  
In that case, it would have to be borrowed from a neighboring agency. 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
Council Member DuBois questioned the equipment amounts listed and 
whether they were seeking new equipment.  There was discussion about 
some of the equipment.   
Vice Mayor Kou was concerned reassurance that listing the equipment the 
department has available could put the department at a disadvantage.   
Acting Captain Reifschneider stated there was nothing cutting edge or 
proprietary and felt confident that it would be able to be used without a 
problem.  
Public comment  
1. Rebecca Eisenberg discussed the legislative history of this legislation 
and that these weapons need to be approved by the community.  She 
stated she did not approve of the use of military grade weapons in the 
local police force.  
2. Aram James stated this act requires a public forum before it becomes 
an action item.  He objected to every weapon listed without more 
information.   
3. Winter Dellenbach was glad this information was out in the open so 
that the public is aware of this information.   
Council Member Cormack clarified when the annual report will be provided.  
She felt this was an opportunity to come up with better alternatives to the 
equipment currently available.   
 
Pulled From Consent for Discussion  
11. 
Recommendation from the Human Relations Commission on the 
naming of the holiday on the second Monday in October 
 
MOTION:  Council Member Stone moved seconded by Mayor Burt to 
name the second Monday of October as Indigenous People’s Day and 
Italian Heritage Day. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
 
Council Member Stone believed it was appalling to consider naming the 
holiday both Indigenous People's Day and Columbus Day.  He read excerpts 
from an email from Dr. David Stannard supporting his opinion.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 21 
City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes 9/12/2022 
Mayor Burt concurred with Council Member Stone and wanted to recognize a 
more accurate history while embracing the rich history of Italian immigrants 
in America.   
Council Member Tanaka supported the idea of Indigenous People's Day but 
questioned Italian Day as opposed to something more encompassing like 
Immigrants' Day.   
Council Member Stone stated that many Italian Americans unofficially 
celebrate their own heritage on Columbus Day with the belief that Columbus 
was Italian.   
Council Member DuBois spoke about the history involving hate crimes 
against Italians in New Orleans.   
Council Member Kou agreed with the idea of Immigrants' Day but not on 
Italian Heritage Day.   
 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack spoke about the recent Cal Cities conference and 
shared some notes she had taken.   
Mayor Burt spoke about recent events, including the National Day of Service.   
 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:10 P.M. 
 
ATTEST:                                             
 
APPROVED:           
____________________ 
 
 
____________________                                 
City Clerk                                          
 
 Mayor 
NOTE: Action minutes are prepared in accordance with Palo Alto Municipal 
Code (PAMC) 2.04.160(a) and (b). Summary minutes (sense) are prepared 
in accordance with PAMC Section 2.04.160(c). Beginning in January 2018, in 
accordance with Ordinance No. 5423, the City Council found action minutes 
and the video/audio recordings of Council proceedings to be the official 
records of both Council and committee proceedings. These recordings are 
available on the City’s website. 
