CITY COUNCIL 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 15 
Special Meeting 
 
September 27, 2022 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council Chambers and by virtual 
teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present in person:  
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Stone, Tanaka 
Present Virtually:  
 
Absent: 
 
Kou  
 
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH LABOR NEGOTIATORS City Designated Representatives: City 
Manager and his Designees Pursuant to Merit System Rules and Regulations (Ed 
Shikada, Kiely Nose, Sandra Blanch, Nicholas Raisch, Tori Anthony, Molly Stump, and 
Terence Howzell) Employee Organization: Service Employees International Union, (SEIU) 
Local 521, Utilities Management and Professional Association of Palo Alto 
(UMPAPA)Palo Alto Peace Officers’ Association (PAPOA), Palo Alto Police Management 
Association (PMA), International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF) local 1319, Palo Alto 
Fire Chiefs Association (FCA), Management and Professional Employees (MGMT) ; 
Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6 (a) 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:03 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:30 P.M. 
Mayor Burt announced there was no reportable action.  
Special Order of the Day 
2. 
2022 US Mayor Climate Protection Award Recognition 
Mayor Burt commented the award was undeservedly presented to the Mayor and was an 
award achieved by staff and with the work of consultants, and they deserved it. He 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
acknowledged the folks involved, who were present for recognition. He outlined what the 
project entailed. He presented the award to the team, and a photo was taken.  
3. 
Palo Alto Art Center and Palo Alto Art Center Foundation presentation of Fire 
Transforms exhibit and Climate Connections series 
Mayor Burt acknowledged Karen Kienzle and Karen Kwan of the Palo Alto Art Foundation.  
Director at Palo Alto Art Center Karen Kienzle spoke of the Art Center’s exhibitions of Fire 
Transforms and Climate Connections. She provided slides highlighting what the exhibitions 
presented and referenced the goals of the exhibitions. She showcased some free public 
programs offered in conjunction with the show. Upcoming exhibitions would focus on water 
and contemporary art and, in the summer, there would be a juried exhibition exploring the 
theme of earth.  
Director of Development at Palo Alto Art Center Foundation Karen Kwan discussed City budget 
cuts impacting the Exhibition Program. She looked forward to collaborating with the City in 
furthering the Sustainability and Climate Action Plan.  
Mayor Burt expressed his appreciation for the Art Center Foundation.  
Council Member Cormack suggested the Art Center have a table at the Workshop on Climate 
Action in October.  
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None.  
Public Comment 
 
Ken Horowitz believed Cubberley was an important priority for the City and was looking 
forward to the newly elected City Council and School Board members addressing it. He hoped 
the School Board liaison of the Council would ask Don Austin at next month’s meeting what he 
thought about the future of Cubberley. He wondered if funds could be found for Cubberley.  
 
Lisa Forssell served on the Utilities Advisory Commission but was representing herself and 
addressed Measure L and the differences in the City’s gas utility and PG&E. She asked the 
Council to consider not lowering the cost of fossil fuels, which needed to be transitioned away 
from, compared to electric power and urged the public to vote for Measure L.  
 
Matt Schelgel discussed the ongoing climate crisis and the importance of stopping the use of 
fossil fuels.  
 
Aram James read some information regarding the use of canines and the Holocaust. He would 
ask Senator Josh Becker and Assemblymember Marc Berman to address legislation ending the 
use of police canines.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
Consent Calendar 
4. 
Approve Minutes from the September 12, 2022 City Council Meetings 
5. 
Approval of Outage Management System (OMS) Contract C23184285 With Milsoft 
Solutions Inc. in the Amount Not to Exceed $625,994 Over a 5-Year Term 
6. 
Adoption of Resolution 10072 Approving and Attesting to the Veracity of the City's 2021 
Annual Power Source Disclosure and Power Content Label Reports 
7. 
Approval of a First Amendment to Lease Between KG-Bryant, LLC, and the City of Palo 
Alto for the Premises Located at 526 Bryant Street for an Initial 12-month Term, at a 
Starting Base Rent of $5,616.11 per Month and Increasing 3 Percent Annually 
8. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of Ordinance 5561 for Renovation of the Mitchell Park Dog 
Park as Recommended by the Parks and Recreation Commission (FIRST READING: 
September 12, 2022 PASSED: 7-0) 
9. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of Ordinance 5562 Approving the Police Department's 
Military Equipment Use Policy Under AB 481 (FIRST READING: September 12, 2022 
PASSED 7-0) 
Public Comment 
Aram James asked the City Council to look at AB481 and transparency, to take it off the 
calendar, discuss it more thoroughly, and bring it back up. 
MOTION:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to approve Agenda Item 
Numbers 4-9.  
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 5. 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 4, 6-9:  6-0 
MOTION PASSED ITEMS 5:  5-1, Tanaka no 
Council Member Tanaka thought it important to notify people in the event of power outages 
but that there were ways of doing it at a lower cost and would rather see funds allocated 
toward reducing outages.  
City Manager Comments 
 
 
City Manager Ed Shikada provided an update related to the pandemic. Upcoming was the Great 
Glass Pumpkin Patch. Over the next week or two, folks would be receiving the Annual 
Community Survey. He highlighted the website of cityofpaloalto.org/sustainabilityhub 
regarding 
the 
City’s 
Climate 
Action 
Plan, 
and 
tools 
were 
available 
at 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
cityofpaloalto.org/goelectric for those interested in taking action. Upcoming City Council 
meetings: October 3, S/CAP Update (Part 2) as well as Council discussion and potential action 
on taking positions on the November 2022 ballot; October 17, a prescreening of the 
developmental proposal related the Creekside Inn on El Camino Real and the 2022 Green 
Building updates; October 24 and beyond, NVCAP, Parklet Standards, and Economic 
Development Study Session. The October 10th Council meeting would be cancelled.  
Action Items 
10. 
S/CAP Update and Initial Council Action:  Acceptance of Sustainability and Climate 
Action Plan (S/CAP) Goals and Key Actions; Review of Proposed Reach Code Changes; 
Adoption of Resolutions Adopting Advanced Heat Pump Water Heater Program 
Guidelines, Creating and Funding Electrification Reserves and Adopting a Carbon 
Neutrality Goal; and Approval of Budget Amendments in the Electric Fund, Gas Fund, 
and General Fund 
Mayor Burt declared there would be a continuation of this item on October 3 for discussion and 
expected actions the Council would take, but because it was so comprehensive, the Council and 
the public would be brought up to date on the facets of the program tonight. There would be 
opportunities for public comment at both meetings but asked the public speak on only one of 
the two nights, which the public could decide.  
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston noted the proposed items represented the culmination of 
staff and the S/CAP Ad Hoc Committee’s work over the past year. The bulk of the staff 
presentation would be divided into three main parts with a review of the proposed S/CAP goals 
and key actions, the proposed Green Building Ordinance items in advance of them coming to 
Council for review in October, and the group of actions that would allow the launch of the City’s 
proposed new Advanced Heat Pump Water Heater Pilot Program. He emphasized the 
intradepartmental nature of the S/CAP work. He briefly reviewed information setting the stage 
for some of the actions being proposed. He shared slides of Palo Alto’s GHG emissions for 1990 
through 2020. He noted what needed to be focused on by 2030 to reach the 80 x 30 goal. He 
supplied slides outlining ongoing work by staff, the S/CAP Ad Hoc Committee and Working 
Group and Working Group teams going on in 2022. The first new program being recommended 
for Council approval was the Advanced Heat Pump Water Heater Pilot Program, and a key next 
step was for staff to update the S/CAP Three-Year Work Plan to include the work needed in 
other areas, which were critical. After these items being before Council this week and next 
week, the staff’s next priority would be updating the Three-Year Work Plan with a goal of 
bringing it back to the City Council by the end of calendar year 2022 for acceptance. He 
acknowledged valid concerns regarding increasing the electric demand through these 
programs. They were promoting heat pump water heaters citywide while grid modernization 
work occurred. Grid modernization was a high priority and necessary to support wider 
conversion on a citywide scale of gas equipment to electric and would be part of their planning 
going forward.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
Sustainability Manager Christine Luong displayed slides of the fourth version of the S/CAP goals 
and key actions. She indicated what the prior three versions entailed. The fourth version was 
meant to be a high-level roadmap to achieve the 80 x 30 goal. Once Council accepted the goals 
and key actions, they would be able to commence the CEQA evaluation of the full S/CAP. The 
full goals and key actions were in Attachment A on Packet Page 104, and slides had been 
prepared in the event Council wanted to discuss them in detail. The eight areas of S/CAP were 
all equally important but three – energy, electric vehicles (EVs), and mobility – had the highest 
potential for the largest GHG emissions reductions. She indicated what the key actions for the 
climate action area covered. There was one staff and Council action, which was to present 
options to Council for consideration to accelerate EV mobility and energy emissions reductions 
activities. Slides were furnished regarding goals, key action categories, and key performance 
indicators (KPIs) for energy, EVs and mobility.  Goals and KPIs for water were presented. She 
furnished goals, key action categories, and KPIs for climate adaptation and sea level rise, 
restoring and enhancing the natural environment, and zero waste.  
Mayor Burt mentioned there was more in Attachment A in the Staff Report than what had been 
summarized, and Attachment A was a very extensive update to the S/CAP goals and key 
actions, and all were important elements of the Compressive Climate and  Sustainability Plan.   
Council Member Filseth stated some slides indicated other reductions to be determined would 
be needed in addition to what was in the program to reach the 230,000 metric tons a year by 
2030 and asked how close we would get to that goal if the other reductions yet to be 
determined was not done.  
Director Eggleston recalled being 7% away and would have to calculate that into thousands of 
metric tons.  
Mayor Burt referenced Slide 3 indicating doing away with fossil fuels was costly, but he 
remarked it was more cost efficient over the long and medium term. He spoke of alternative 
ways of replacing fossil fuels. Slowing climate change was an urgent need, and Palo Alto could 
have a high impact on what other cities, etc., would do. This would be addressed more with the 
Committee Report.  
Council Member Cormack indicated the gap between the complicated details and what people 
were seeing and feeling needed to be bridged. It would make a difference what individuals 
would be asked to do and what the community would do regarding Section C5 on Page 108. 
Electric grid modernization (Page 110) needed to be discussed in significant detail. Electrifying 
fleet vehicles (Page 112) was a huge opportunity and beyond what individuals would do. 
Decisionmaking had been delayed until and unless there was a bicycle and pedestrian 
transportation plan, and parking had been talked about as well (Page 114). The water portfolio 
was remarkably important, and she would have comments in the Reach Code section. People 
started worrying more than a few years ago regarding the levee (Section S3 on Page 119).  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
Council Member Tanaka inquired if a lot of the electrical supply was renewable and provided by 
solar and wind; if hydropower was dropping because of the drought; and where the power 
came from at night with no sun or wind. He was interested to know the pure carbon output 
from electricity. He wanted to know if it could be calculated how much carbon would be 
extracted and the return on investment by the various programs and what source or program 
would extract the most amount of carbon for the dollars spent.  
Director Eggleston confirmed a lot of the electrical supply was renewable and provided by solar, 
wind, and hydropower. He could have Utility Staff speak to the specifics of hydropower and the 
drought. Some work had been done over a year ago regarding carbon reduction and return on 
investment. They were trying to look broadly at the rough level of carbon reduction and cost in 
the Three-Year Work Plan, but there was not a plan to do an in-depth financial analysis.  
Assistant Director of Resource Management Jonathan Abendschein specified the power at night 
came from a mix of hydropower, wind, and landfill gas. If those sources were not sufficient, 
power from the grid would be used. He explained carbon-free energy was sometimes put into 
the electric system and replaced grid power and gas power plants. He referred to a carbon 
neutral electric portfolio goal. He would get back to the Council as to the pure carbon output 
from electricity, as an annual report was coming up.  
Council Member Stone considered this critical. He asked the current percentage of the tree 
canopy; if staff had plans for getting the additional tree canopy percentage needed; if the plan 
made the distinction of planting young or mature trees or tree size; and if the plan would 
extend the ban on commercial use of gas-powered leaf blowers for commercial use. He 
encouraged commercial use be banned.  
Director Eggleston declared the current tree canopy was 36%. There were a number of 
programs in the City’s Urban Forest Master Plan, which had the goals of expanding the canopy 
as well as tracking the progress.  
Urban Forester Pete Gollinger remarked the programs in the Urban Forest Master Plan focused 
on adding additional trees while the new ordinance focused on preserving mature trees and on 
native climate adaptive species.  
Sustainability Manager Luong commented the new law would be followed, which would phase 
out all gas-powered gardening and lawn equipment for residential and commercial. She 
believed the phase out on the sale, not use, of new units would start in 2024.  
Mayor Burt expressed phasing out existing gas-powered gardening and lawn equipment was a 
separate issue.  
Council Member DuBois indicated he was a member of the Ad Hoc, and his input was reflected 
in the report and presentation.  
Public Comments  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
Lisa Forssell (In-Person) served on the Utilities Advisory Commission but was representing 
herself. She supported the Heat Pump Water Heater Pilot Program and favored the option of a 
7-year $20 per month payment period, but all options were viable. She supported all Reach 
Codes as proposed in the report. She inquired if there had been outreach to local labor unions 
regarding the development of an electrification workforce. She voiced that Low-wattage EV 
chargers and heat pumps would make a difference in the grid health and modernization costs.  
 
Carol Kiparsky (In- Person) hoped all would vote to implement the S/CAP. She opined that in the 
first year single-occupancy vehicles, E-busses, etc., should also be focused on in addition to the 
Heat Pump Water Heater Project and that the burden of climate change should be placed on 
the fossil fuel industry, not individual citizens, which the key action addressed.   
 
David Sacerdote supported the S/CAP but thought it needed to go further in working for a full 
phaseout of stoves, etc., by the mid-2030s and that it would be ideal to have a planned 
conversion of whole neighborhoods from gas to electric.  
 
Peter Drekmeier was more excited with carbon sequestration over carbon offsets. He spoke of 
pyrolysis being an additional sustainability technology. He would love to see a focus on planting 
more oak trees.  
 
Katie Rueff was excited by the prospect of rolling out the Heat Pump Water Heater Turnkey 
Program. In the future, she and the youth of the PASCC would like to see a partnership between 
the City and the youth climate movement.  
 
Pat Martin was Building Manager for the Peninsula Conservation Center. When the Council was 
ready, they could provide suggestions for making the permitting and installation go more 
smoothy, quicky, and hopefully less expensive for folks switching from rooftop gas units to 
electric heat pumps.  
 
Cedric Pitot de La Beaujardiere supported heat pump water heaters and HVAC systems. He 
encouraged the Council to support the increased use of solar panels to offset the additional 
electricity that would be used by the electric appliances and encouraged increasing incentives, 
such as buying and selling from utility customers at the same price, as the current pricing model 
seemed to be a disincentive to get solar. He was encouraged by reducing carbon as well as the 
efforts to sequester and draw carbon from the atmosphere and pointed to regeneration.org.  
 
Robert Neff supported heat pump water heaters and the switch to EVs. He stated gas heating of 
homes had not been addressed, and there would still be plenty of carbon emissions from EVs if 
only cars were depended on for transportation. He asked for an accelerated option of the 
mobility changes called for in the Sustainability Plan. He voiced that streets needed to be 
comfortable for pedestrians, bicycling, etc.  
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
Julia Zeitlin, a member of the Ad Hoc Working Group and co-founder of PASSC, urged approval 
of the S/CAP ASAP. She suggested developing technology, such as bidirectional charging, be 
explored to alleviate grid stress. She believed a 2030 carbon neutrality program should be 
adopted that would work in tandem with the 80 x 30 goal.  
 
Vicki Veenker was encouraged by the ideas of how to move more aggressively toward clean 
energy, 80 x 30 goals, and carbon neutrality by 2035. She encouraged Council to support the 
programs phasing out gas appliances at their end of life and programs helping residents finance 
new heat pump appliances by rebates or other means and asked commercial building owners 
to participate similar to residential owners, such as Key Action Item E2 in the draft S/CAP. 
 
Hamilton Hitchings requested staff be more conservative in sea-level rise protection projects 
and that areas of Highway 101 protection be prioritized. He suggested adding geographic 
redundancy to the electric grid and asked that heat pump water heaters for older houses be 
optional. He supported paying for residential rooftop solar and opined the City should resist 
NEM 3.0.  
 
Matt Schlegal (In-Person) asked everyone to stop burning fossil fuels. 
 
Winter Dellenbach spoke of Palo Alto’s strong tree protection ordinance and of the many trees 
being saved and planted. She encouraged planting as many oaks as possible.     
 
Sherry Listgarten appreciated the work being done. She thought there were physical and 
mental health benefits in cleaning up the air and adding trees.  
 
Dashiell Leeds was Conservation Organizer for the Sierra Club Loma Prieta Chapter, and the 
Chapter supported the rapid approval and implementation of the S/CAP, the Advanced Heat 
Pump Water Heater Program, and the inclusion of the carbon neutrality goal. He provided 
information in reference the risks of gas cooking from a 2013 meta-analysis, and he hoped to 
achieve a future without operational gas pipelines.  
Mayor Burt announced staff would present the Reach Code and the Heat Pump Water Heater 
Program. 
Chief Building Official George Hoyt gave a presentation on the Green Building and Local Energy 
Code updates. He specified the California Building Code Standard was updated every three 
years, and the current code cycle covered January 2020 through December 2022. He 
referenced what was needed for local jurisdictions to adopt local building energy standards 
more efficient than the State’s Energy Code and amendments more stringent than the State’s 
Mandatory Green Building requirements. Palo Alto adopted Green Building regulations and 
local energy standards in 2008. He specified what the local regulations were intended to create. 
He rehashed the 2019 through 2022 building code cycle. City Council needed to approve a new 
set of Reach Codes by November 2022. He discussed that the 2023 through 2025 State Energy 
Code encouraged electric heat pump technology and required construction to meet all electric-
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
readiness standards. Local amendments from the 2019 Reach Codes would be carried forward 
on the proposed 2022 Reach Codes with additional requirements, which he discussed. The 
proposed 2022 Reach Codes would be effective for a three-year period starting January 1, 2023. 
He presented the proposed requirements for single-family, multi-family, and nonresidential 
buildings. He noted that the numbers presented on Slide 27 differed slightly from the numbers 
in the Staff Report. He outlined the proposals for water efficiency requirements and carbon 
limits related to concrete use in new construction buildings.  
Council Member Cormack asked if the carbon limits were low-carbon concrete and if it was 
substantially more expensive than regular concrete. She was concerned that there was not 
enough being done with regard to water. The Council had a policy of supporting the Bay-Delta 
Plan, which could require using less water. She considered water reuse within buildings with a 
Hydraloop system and questioned if people should be allowed to put in front lawns with new 
construction.  
Chief Building Official Hoyt confirmed carbon limits were low-carbon concrete, which was not 
substantially more expensive.  
Council Member Stone understood the City’s Green Building Ordinance was anticipated to 
provide an additional 1% to 1.5% of the remaining emissions reductions needed to achieve the 
80 x 30 goal and inquired if the anticipated reduction took into account the additional 
emissions likely caused by demolition and new construction. He requested staff analyze those 
critical impacts. Related to projected GHG emission reductions, he requested staff explain 
upstream fuel emissions and which number was being considered in meeting the 80 x 30 goal. 
He asked staff how likely it would be that all households would convert to heat pump water 
heaters and how long would it take and if the pilot lasted until 1,000 units were reached. He 
was concerned there was much to be done in a short amount of time and that it should be 
expedited.  
Director Eggleston remarked the 1.5% did not include additional emissions of demolition and 
new construction, which were consumption-based GHG emissions. Most of the proposals in the 
code updates dealt with reducing ongoing emissions. The carbon issue may have been the first 
opportunity to look at doing consumption-based reductions.  
Assistant Director Abendschein [noted upstream fuel emissions were 3:47:54] fossil fuels from 
the ground and transporting them to where they were burned. Most GHG emissions inventory 
methodology, including the standard methodologies they used to monitor GHG emissions 
goals, did not include a focus on upstream emissions for reducing GHG emissions. However, 
there had been some discussion at the UAC and at the Council of tracking and acknowledging 
upstream emissions, so both numbers were presented wherever possible. The likelihood that 
all households would convert to heat pump water heaters and how long would it take would 
depend on many factors, including program designs and especially engagement and marketing 
efforts. A lot of things could change between now and 2030, and the Air Resources Board rule 
eventually filtering into public awareness could cause acceleration. A lot could be done to 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
influence and control the pace of adoption. The pilot would last until 1,000 units were reached, 
and the goal was to achieve that by the end of 2023.  
Council Member Filseth asked for an explanation of embedded carbon limits performance 
compliance; why there would not be an estimate of the amount of carbon in a new building; 
and if at some point there would be an estimation of the amount of concrete in a new building. 
Being that Reach Codes were being considered and not strictly 80 x 30, he wanted to see 
calculations of how much carbon would be released through embedded emissions. 
Senior Resource Planner Utilities Christine Tam indicated the two ways to meet the low-carbon 
concrete requirement, and a table would be included in the Green Building Ordinance laying 
out the calculation. Why there would not be an estimate of the amount of carbon in a new 
building came back to the Scope 3 definition. Due to there being different types of building 
materials, she thought it was difficult to specify the carbon intensity for a whole new building.  
[____ 3:54:30]. 
Director Eggleston expressed regarding the estimation of the amount of concrete in a new 
building that the consumption-based GHG inventory and embedded emission materials were 
not part of the 80 x 30 goal, and the direct emissions part of the 80 x 30 goal was the ongoing 
emissions, which was the current focus. In the future, Scope 3 emissions would be looked at, 
which would include embedded carbon.  
Mayor Burt expressed this was one of the first steps in looking at Scope 3 emissions and the 
embedded carbon in consumption. The process in subsequent years would pursue carbon 
released through embedded emissions. He expressed that with the acceleration in 
requirements and technologies, Reach Code updates would need to be revisited and updated 
more than every three years. This Reach Code as a set of programs in energy, water, 
electrification, and natural gas elimination on commercial and residential new construction had 
been considered, but excessive water-consuming landscaping had not moved forward and was 
something Council wanted to look at in the future. Once the Reach Code was approved, there 
would be value in organizing and putting together the code to date and the new code items in 
different packages of residential and commercial on electrification and water, so there would 
be understanding of the whole set of code requirements.  
Assistant Director Abendschein discussed the Heat Pump Water Heater Program. He stated 
people needed to retrofit their homes to achieve the 80 x 30 goals, and staff and the S/CAP 
Committee were proposing an ambitious Advanced Heat Pump Water Heater Pilot Program. He 
discussed the goals of the program, installation pricing, the marketing plan, and benefits of heat 
pump water heaters. He noted the program was different than anything they had seen, but 
they were drawing on a range of innovations and features that had been tested in other 
agencies. He provided the estimated cost of getting 1,000 heat pump water heaters installed 
and provided three funding sources for the up-front funding. He outlined how funds coming 
from reserves would be repaid over time. He indicated how they envisioned the program would 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
scale once the 1,000 water heaters in the pilot program were reached and as the pilot program 
progressed how it would help in designing the next stage. He outlined what would be required 
of Palo Altans if all the proposals were approved. 
Director Eggleston presented the recommendations and next steps. They were looking for 
Council direction concerning acceptance of the S/CAP goals and key actions. They had 
resolutions of the design guidelines for the program, establishment of the electrification 
reserve, authorized uses of the Cap-and-Trade Funds, and budget actions. Staff and the Ad Hoc 
Committee agreed a next step ought to be setting a carbon neutrality goal and planning for 
how that would be met beyond 80 x 30, which was not part of accepting the goals and key 
actions, the Reach Code, or the Heat Pump Water Heater Program but was an attachment that 
was a resolution to establish that goal. Along the lines of grid modernization and issues of 
having workforce available, there was discussion of adding a new priority to the City’s 
legislative guidelines that would help support expanding the workforce statewide. He provided 
the staff-recommended motion. The next steps would be expected actions either tonight or 
October 3, Making Better Choices in Your Home Workshop on October 15, and Council 
considering the Green Building and Reach Code updates for approval on October 17. With 
Council approval of the recommendations on the Advanced Heat Pump Water Heater Program, 
it would launch late 2022 or early 2023 but would set in motion the steps for staff to get that in 
place. Following Council’s acceptance of the goals and key actions, an important next step 
would be updating the S/CAP Three-Year Work Plan and bringing it back to Council in 
December. They expected to bring back to Council the full S/CAP with the CEQA for approval 
and certification by next spring. He hoped to see many engaged community members at the 
Making Better Choices in Your Home Workshop on October 15. 
Public Comments Round Two  
Matt Schlegel thought that 20 heat pump water heaters a week needed to be installed to meet 
the 1,000 goal and hoped effort would be put in community outreach, which was a critical 
component. He started an electrical panel upgrade in July and did not have approval and hoped 
that process would be streamlined.  
David Coale supported staff’s recommendation for the S/CAP, the Advanced Heat Pump Water 
Heater Proposal, and the Reach Code for water heater replacement with heat pump water 
heaters. He believed it should be expanded to home space heating and that replacement of gas 
packs with HVAC heat pumps for commercial buildings should also be in the Reach Code. He 
opined that the update of the bike and pedestrian plan was a must.  
Aram James thought water conservation and quality needed to be addressed. He discussed the 
environmental impact of U.S. Military bases in other countries. He wanted to convert to a water 
heat pump at his home. 
Mayor Burt hoped to get an update of lessons learned and recommendations from the Ad Hoc 
Committee.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
Council Member Filseth inquired if a 220-volt hookup was needed for the pilot and what would 
be the circumstances that a panel upgrade would be needed. He voiced the program was a 
good idea and an appropriate use of the Projects Reserve and the Cap-and-Trade Fund.  
Assistant Director Abendschein replied that available water heaters were 240 volt. There was a 
120-volt water heater coming out, which would be looked at as they became more available. 
Most water heaters running a 240 volt would need a new electric circuit and a panel upgrade, 
which was about 20% to 25% of cases, or other types of building modifications.  
Council Member DuBois questioned if someone was to go the turnkey route and pay for it up 
front if they would be eligible for federal rebate. He hoped this would pass and staff would start 
working on the program. On the Climate Plan update, staff needed to begin the CEQA process. 
Carbon neutrality needed to be done. The Green Code updates would come to the Council in 
October. The Ad Hoc Supplemental Report was upcoming, and there was additional projects, 
and it was important a project plan be laid out. When it was time for the Heat Pump Program, a 
lot of the projects should be referred to staff to get them incorporated onto a work plan and 
have them come back to Council. 
Assistant Director Abendschein expected those going the turnkey route and paying for it up 
front would be eligible for a rebate, but some would need to consult with their own tax 
professionals to determine eligibility. They expected a person would be eligible for 30% of the 
cost of $2,700 if the install was done after January 1 but depended on income levels, etc.  
Council Member Stone asked why there was not more aggressive language requiring a higher 
percentage of EV parking spaces for new nonresidential buildings. He was interested in the 
percentage of EV drivers charging their cars at work on a given day. He asked if the Heat Pump 
Water Heater Program would provide free installation and a free water heater to eligible 
income-qualified customers. He would like to see more outreach, and he provided some 
suggestions. He encouraged those concerned about the increased demand on the power grid to 
read the staff report, which explained it well, and to reach out to staff and other experts in the 
community. 
Chief Building Official Hoyt voiced the goal of the service equipment would be sized 
appropriately for EV-ready equipment. The numbers were settled on [as a fair 4:38:57] increase 
of current numbers and to allow proper sizing in transformers and the demand on the service 
grid as new buildings were built and to not oversize the switch-gear equipment and add 
additional cost to building owners.  
Assistant Director Abendschein added there was uncertainty as to how electricity would be 
provided to all the different types of vehicles. There had been much discussion about how to 
get charging. They did not want to assume that in 10-15 years 100% of people would have a 
charger in their location. Eligible income-qualified customers would receive free installation and 
a free water heater.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
Council Member Cormack stated that using the internal loan rate instead of a market rate made 
the Heat Pump Water Heater Program work better. She inquired if the $150,000 for marketing 
and outreach was for a consultant to do the work. She indicated conversations and education 
would occur at the October 15th Workshop and it would not be just providing data. She 
questioned if the carbon neutral goal was achievable. Staff needed to figure out a plan for 
landlords of rental properties to receive utilities information. Instead of saying Advanced Heat 
Pump Water Heater Pilot Program, she suggested saying, “Let us help you do the right thing.” 
The Ad Hoc would talk about how Council would do this work going forward, and a student 
member participating was an opportunity. Implementing the S/CAP was required to protect 
quality of life in Palo Alto. The pilot was appropriately ambitious.  
Assistant Director Abendschein confirmed the $150,000 for marketing and outreach was for 
consulting, internal staff time absorbed within the existing budget.  
Sustainability Manager Luong indicated the carbon neutral goal was achievable. 
Council Member Tanaka asked why not also consider solar water heating, which also had a 
quick return on investment; systems using an air conditioner condenser to heat water; or a 
condensing water heater instead of just heat pump water heaters. His was concerned the 
program represented only about 2% of the goal at a cost of $7.5M and other things could be 
considered, which would be a fraction of the cost. He asked how many water heaters are 
replaced every year in Palo Alto. He wondered if this was the highest [invested 4:45:44] use of 
[inaudible 4:56:46] resources as opposed to a transportation program and if that would have a 
bigger impact on overall carbon output. He asked if there were calculations comparing this 
program to other programs. He questioned what was delaying the Scooter Share Pilot Program, 
which was approved three years ago. He was concerned there were other programs that could 
have a bigger impact in terms of carbon output. 
Assistant Director Abendschein expressed there had been a solar water heating program for a 
long time, which was retired a couple years ago. There were struggles in having a strong 
enough return on investment to get people to participate. They were supportive of solar water 
heating but had not found a way to make the programs work. It could be looked at as a 
complement to a heat pump water heater. He was interested in Council Member Tanaka 
sharing information and numbers he had. There were some innovative water heating systems 
coming out, and the condenser was one. For this pilot program, they were trying to keep it as 
simple as possible, so there was a focus on one technology. There was no reason there could 
not be expansion to other technologies once they became familiar with the heat pump 
technology. He indicated the State’s Go Green Financing Program could accommodate these 
kind of systems, and as whole-home electrification pilots were expanded, a variety of systems 
would be looked at. Condensing water heater systems were looked at, but they did not 
approach the efficiency of a heat pump water heater with regard to emissions reductions. They 
estimated 1,100 to 1,400 water heaters were replaced per year, based on the average lifetime 
and number of homes, in Palo Alto. Calculations comparing this program to other programs 
were presented in April 2021 as part of the impact analysis, and those could be forwarded to 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
the Council. Transportation was the majority of the remaining emissions reductions that 
needed to be achieved. There was a similar amount of investment being made in 
transportation-related programs. There was a presentation to the UAC in early September, and 
he would share that link. This was all hands on deck, and everything needed to be focused on to 
achieve the 80 x 30 goals, and there was an interest in jumpstarting building electrification.  
Director Eggleston commented one element of the work was moving quickly to get a program 
in place, and this program focusing on heat pump water heaters was not meant to say every 
other possible solution had been looked at. This had the most parameters in what was trying to 
be achieved and seemed like something that could quickly be scaled with the community and 
actually get a program in place rather than spending time looking at other solutions. In the 
future, looking at other ideas and finding ways to include them could be considered. The 
Scooter Share Pilot Program had been delayed due to staff vacancies in the Office of 
Transportation and could get more attention soon.  
Mayor Burt declared that doing a successful model and large-scale pilot would allow the Heat 
Pump Water Heater Program to be scaled and would serve as a model for future appliance 
upgrades and other needed programs. The funds being used were predominantly a revolving 
loan, not an expenditure. Heat pumps were rapidly evolving, and the foundation of this 
program could provide other scaling opportunities in the coming years. He voiced some of the 
lessons and advances in EV charging. Council would discuss and go into action regarding EV 
charging on October 3. Regarding the heat pump water heaters, the general framework and 
many components of the plan were aligned with the proposal that Carbon Free Palo Alto had 
been working on for several years and had proposed to the City. They titled it Be Smart, and 
Council could call it that or come up with another brand name. There needed to be good 
marketing and branding as it was liable to be copied. There was an article, he thought in The 
New Yorker, that highlighted the Carbon Free Palo Alto BE Smart Program. He listed some of 
those involved in the this process, the community, Stanford, etc., and Palo Alto did not have 
staff capacity to do all that needed to be done, so figuring out how resources would be 
leveraged was needed. 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
None. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at X:XX P.M. 
MOTION:  Council Member XX moved, seconded by Council Member XX to  
1. 
Accept the proposed S/CAP Goals and Key Actions (Attachment A) as a summary of the 
City’s workplan under the S/CAP Framework; 
2. 
Direct staff to implement the Advanced Heat Pump Water Heater Program by: 
A. 
Adopting a resolution (Attachment C) approving the Advanced Heat Pump Water Heater 
Program Design Guidelines; 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 15 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  09/27/2022 
B. 
Adopting a resolution (Attachment D) creating an Electrification Reserve, establishing 
reserve guidelines, and transferring $4.5 million from the Electric Special Projects 
Reserve to the Electrification Reserve; 
C. 
Adopting a resolution (Attachment E) amending the City’s Policy on the Use of Freely 
Allocated Allowances Under the State's Cap-and-Trade Program and authorizing the City 
Manager to use $1.25 million from the Gas Utility Cap and Trade Reserve for the 
Advanced Heat Pump Water Heater program; and 
D. 
Amending the Fiscal Year 2023 Budget Appropriation (requires a 2/3 vote) by: 
(i) 
For the Electric Utility Funds: 
a. 
Increase Electric Resource Management Operating Expenses for Contract Services by 
$4,763,000 
b. 
Decrease Electrification Reserve by $4.5 million  
c. 
Decrease Electric Supply Operations Reserve by $150,000 
d. 
Decrease Electric Distribution Operations Reserve by $86,000 
(ii) 
(ii) For the Gas Utility Funds: 
a. 
Increase Gas Resource Management Operating Expenses for Contract Services by $1.25 
million 
b. 
Decrease Gas Cap & Trade Reserve by $1.25 million 
(iii) 
For the General Fund: 
a. 
Increase Planning & Development Operating Expenses for Contract Services by $250,000 
b. 
Increase Planning and Development Services Revenue for Inspection Fees by $250,000 
3. 
Adopt a Resolution Adopting a Carbon Neutrality Goal to Further the Climate Goals of 
the Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (Attachment F) 
4. 
Direct staff to amend the 2022 Utilities Legislative Guidelines (Attachment G) to include 
an Electrification Workforce Development guideline 
MOTION PASSED/FAILED:  7-0 
Resolutions for 10 
• 
RESO 10073 – Item 10 (MT 14606): S/CAP: approving the Advanced Heat Pump Water 
Heater Program Design Guidelines (Attachment C) 
• 
RESO 10074 – Item 10 (MT 14606): S/CAP: creating an Electrification Reserve, 
establishing reserve guidelines, and transferring $4.5 million from the Electric Special 
Projects Reserve to the Electrification Reserve (Attachment D) 
• 
RESO 10075 – Item 10 (MT 14606): S/CAP: amending the City’s Policy on the Use of 
Freely Allocated Allowances Under the State's Cap-and-Trade Program and authorizing 
the City Manager to use $1.25 million from the Gas Utility Cap and Trade Reserve for the 
Advanced Heat Pump Water Heater program (Attachment E) 
• 
RESO 10076 – Item 10 (MT 14606): S/CAP: Adopting a Carbon Neutrality Goal to Further 
the Climate Goals of the Sustainability and Climate Action Plan (Attachment F) 
