CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 29
Special Meeting
August 1, 2022
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5: 00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Cormack, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka
Present Virtually:  
DuBois
Absent: 
None
Special Orders of the Day
1. Appreciation for Assembly Member Marc Berman
Mayor Burt remarked about receiving great support from state and federal
legislators on funding for city initiatives and he wanted to acknowledge
and
appreciate the work that Assembly Member Marc Berman has done to help
obtain a $5.4 million earmark for Fire Station # 4. 
Assembly Member Berman stated this has been a priority of his for a long
time. He stated there were good budgetary times at the state level to fund
critical projects and this was at the top of his list. He toured Fire Stations 3
and 4 about 10 years ago and saw the working conditions the antiquated fire
stations provided. He stated he knows the importance to the community for
first responders to react as quickly as possible. 
Council Member Cormack stated she toured Fire Stations 3 and 4 earlier this
year and in side- by- side photos compared to a while ago, the difference was
shocking. She stated her appreciation of Assembly Member Berman in
helping with this project. 
Council Member Tanaka stated he really appreciated what Assembly Member
Berman has done for the city. 
Study Session
2. Study Session on Status of National and Regional Airplane Noise
Initiatives
City Manager Ed Shikada explained the reason to have a study session on
this topic. This has been a long- standing priority and issue of concern for
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
Palo Alto community members and they provide periodic updates to the
Council. He thought it would be important to give the Council and
Community a status report on issues locally and nationally on the topic of
aircraft noise. The Council has established a protocol for staff to respond to
any issues of concern as they come up. He stated the public works director
will lead ongoing engagement on this topic. A number of residents continue
to monitor and provide support to the city’s engagement in aircraft noise
issues. 
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston presented an agenda listing the
upcoming speakers. He will give an update on Palo Alto’ s engagement with
SFO about their GBAS project over the last year. He emphasized this session
was not about Palo Alto’s airport and a separate discussion with the Council
is planned for this fall that will include review of issues like noise, unleaded
fuel, and the work they are doing to plan for sustainability at the airport. 
Peter Kirsch of Kaplan Kirsch Rockwell talked about what is going on
nationally with respect to airport noise issues. Topics covered were the FAA’ s
Neighborhood
Environmental
Survey ( NES) from 2021, Congressional
activity, and NextGen and flight paths. The NES is an effort to determine
whether the manner in which the FAA reports on noise impacts remains valid
as the data upon which the FAA relied is outdated and from 1979 and years
before. Research done outside of the United States determined the data is
no longer applicable. The goal of the study was to produce a nationally
representative curve for noise from civil aircraft operations, principally fixed-
wing as opposed to helicopters, and how that related to annoyance to
aircraft noise exposure. Two important terms are the metric and the
threshold. The metric is the manner in which the FAA reports noise. Average
day- night noise level is DNL or CNEL. This metric was not being examined in
the NES. The purpose of the survey was to examine the threshold or what
level of noise is sufficiently high to generate community annoyance and to
deserve federal intervention either under environmental
laws or other very
specialized laws. The NES results found the estimated percent of people who
were highly annoyed by aircraft noise. Mr. Kirsch showed a chart where a
noise exposure level of 50 dB annoyed 20 percent of the population and a
noise exposure level of 75 dB made more than 80 percent of the public
highly annoyed. Highly annoyed is the terminology the FAA uses to
determine when noise levels are sufficient to warrant federal reaction. 
Another chart showed comparisons of 2021 data to 1979 data. The level of
public annoyance the FAA believed existed is much lower than it is today. 
The conclusion of the FAA study is that people are annoyed at a much lower
level today than they were in 1979. Mr. Kirsch went over the implications of
the NES. It could determine levels of noise eligible for mitigation under the
FAA’ s Part 150 regulations and affect residential soundproofing, land use
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
planning, funding under the federal grant programs, and avigation
easements. Currently all of those assume that there are no significant noise
impacts at levels below 65 dB. As seen on the chart, that assumption is not
accurate today. There are also implications for environmental review. In
terms of NEPA, the National Environmental Policy Act, and CEQA, questions
arise as to the scope of the impact area and the method of analysis. The
NES did not examine if DNL was the correct metric. Part 161 of the FAA
regulations define how and when airports can restrict operations for noise
reasons. There are questions about whether airports may have increased
liability for noise at levels below 65 which courts have accepted to be the
threshold of significant impact. Mr. Kirsch stated that perhaps the most
important implication of the study is managing community expectations. 
Communities have been raising concerns about noise levels that are far less
than 65 and the FAA has taken the position of not analyzing noise below 65
dB. This study suggests that level is no longer appropriate. The FAA received
thousands of comments about the NES. The FAA says it plans to engage all
the FAA lines of business and it will hire the Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service to analyze the impacts and mediate different views on
the impacts of the study. Unfortunately, the FAA has no timeline or defined
regulatory path. Mr. Kirsch does not believe the FAA will do anything soon. 
Other studies are underway by reputable universities on sleep disturbances
and health effects. Congress has established a Quiet Skies Caucus and
Congresswoman
Ann Eshoo is an active member. They ensure Congress
pays attention to the noise issues and puts pressure on the FAA where
appropriate. There have been a couple congressional efforts in the last year
or two on noise. District- specific legislation through the annual
appropriations
process has required the FAA to do studies, examine noise
impacts, and be more community sensitive. There were unsuccessful efforts
by Congresswomen Bass and Speier to add language to the infrastructure
bill earlier this year to address noise. In May 2022, Congress had oversight
hearings on the need to address noise impacts. Every 5 years or so, FAA
reauthorization
occurs. This is an opportunity for Congress to legislate on
policy issues regarding the FAA. The next reauthorization is in 2023 and
Congress has begun drafting legislation. Noise metrics and thresholds are
very likely to be a topic. It is likely there will be language dealing with noise
metrics, noise thresholds, implementation
of NextGen, and the noise impacts
of drones and advanced air mobility or electric aircraft. These are the issues
to watch and be engaged in. Other hot Congressional topics include
Metroplex and NextGen and the appropriateness of the DNL metric, 
thresholds, local flexibility on restrictions, and other studies. NexGen and
flight paths continue to be issues of significance. The FAA did very little
additional work during the pandemic on new NextGen flight paths or
metroplexes. Metroplex implementation has been completed in 11 of 21
metropolitan
areas and the FAA continues to tweak those areas. There were
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
no new metroplex rollouts during the pandemic and there is very little
remaining litigation over metroplex resulting in a period of quiet policy
making and litigation but he expects that to heat up a bit in the coming
months as the FAA focuses on other parts of the country without metroplex
implementation. 
James Allerdice, Jr. of Vianair gave some background on GBAS, Ground
Based Augmentation System. They assessed the impact of GBAS on the
community. GBAS equipment in the United States is provided by Honeywell
primarily. There are only a few systems that have been deployed so far. 
GBAS boosts the existing satellite signal so aircraft get a much higher fidelity
signal when close to the airport. The generic term is Local Area
Augmentation System and GBAS is the equipment that provides that service. 
This provides improvement, or navigational fidelity, over the existing wide
area augmentation
system that allows aircraft to shoot approaches to
category I minimums. When it is cloudy, aircraft can get down to 250 feet
above the ground with the wide area augmentation system. The GBAS
allows them to get lower to the ground in CAT II or CAT III approach
minimums with the goal to maybe get to an auto land capability which can
be done with current ILS systems. This becomes an economic boon for the
FAA and airports in that each runway has an ILS system and replacing all
the ILS systems with one system makes a lot of economic sense to them. 
There is a long way to go before GBAS is accepted and implemented
around
the United States but the good news is the narrowing of the flight paths
experienced with RNAV or RNP will not be significantly more affected by
GBAS. The flight tracks are already pretty narrow and those concentrated
paths will not get worse to a perceptible amount by the use of GBAS. 
Because GBAS is a new system, it requires new flight procedures to be made
and the good news about that is it opens up the possibility of having input
into those flight procedures to maybe mitigate some of the impact to the
communities. Aircraft receive signals from multiple GPS satellites and when
they get in the vicinity of an airport, GBAS augments their signal allowing
them to be more precise in their navigation around airports and when
departing and landing. Mr. Allerdice displayed a video concept by the FAA of
the possible use of GBAS. It displayed the ability of GBAS to enable a
program called MARS, Multiple Airport Route Separation. Planes would use
paths in close proximity to each other and give the airports more capacity.  
Director Eggleston stated SFO’ s goals for the project are to use the more
precise approach pathways that GBAS is able to provide to reduce noise and
emissions. Potential ways are to use approaches that keep aircraft further off
shore and use increased approach angles so aircraft can fly higher over
impacted communities on approach. Palo Alto has hosted 3 community
meetings where staff and consultants presented information about GBAS and
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
answered questions from members of the public. GBAS overlays of existing
RNAV approaches began in March 2022 and are exact duplicates of existing
approaches. Innovative approaches ( IAs) as called by SFO are those where
they are hoping to use GBAS to make noise improvements. Group 1
Innovative Approaches were submitted to the FAA in April 2022. 
Unfortunately, they were submitted before Palo Alto was able to host the
third community meeting. Group 2 Innovative Approaches and other
potential groups are those that SFO thinks have a greater potential for noise
reduction. Development of those IAs is just beginning. Palo Alto has some
concerns regarding this project. Firstly, Palo Alto has not been allowed to be
a member of the SFO Roundtable whose members have been discussing and
giving authorizations related to GBAS. Group 1 IAs were submitted to the
Roundtable and submitted to the FAA before Palo Alto could provide input. 
We think it important there be a robust noise monitoring program so we can
verify that is the case. There is currently no such program proposed by SFO. 
Palo Alto has a strong interest in engagement with SFO to make sure that
these Group 2 IAs and others beyond that take full opportunities for noise
reduction. These concerns were raised in a May 31, 2022, letter from the
City of Palo Alto to SFO. We received a response from SFO on June 17, 
2022, and are currently reviewing it. 
Mayor Burt asked if they had seen the response letter. 
Director Eggleston stated it was provided to the Council shortly after it was
received and it is also posted publicly. 
Council Member Stone asked Mr. Kirsch what legislation is needed to require
noise monitoring and fund this from the Airport Improvement
Program ( AIP) 
for communities like Palo Alto outside of DNL 65 contour? 
Mr. Kirsch stated Congress can direct the FAA to change the metric and the
threshold but this is not likely. Congress can direct the Agency to revise the
metric and give the Agency a deadline for revising the metric and direct the
FAA to use the new threshold or new metric for all decision making whether
it be under AIP, the grant program, or under Part 150, the noise
compatibility planning program, or other purposes. A number of members of
Congress have already expressed an interest in authoring legislation to that
effect. Mr. Kirsch stated the key is to make sure that the language does not
give the FAA a lot of wiggle room. The more specific Congress is about its
direction, the greater the likelihood the Agency will make the changes being
sought. 
Council Member Stone asked if there is anything they could do to ensure the
FAA reviews its noise policy based on the NES results in a more timely, 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
thoughtful, and transparent review that will take into account impacts to
communities and allow for public comment. 
Mr. Kirsch stated it is critical that Congress impose a deadline.  
Council Member Stone asked Mr. Kirsch if a California state law can be used
to legally challenge the continued use of CNEL 65. 
Mr. Kirsch responded that is complicated and uncertain. Federal law directed
the FAA to establish a single metric and a single threshold in 1979. There is
no comparable California law. The more state agencies pressure localities in
their CEQA documentation to go outside the 65, the greater chance that will
happen statewide. 
Council Member Stone cited the Performance
Based Navigation
Implementation Process, 7100. 41, and asked if the city needed to be a
participant in a full working group in order to request any change. 
Mr. Allerdice replied that many times the airport is the proponent. They can
participate but the level of input they have varies. The FAA and the National
Air Traffic Controllers Association can say yes or no to anything that goes in
based on safety, operational impact, etc. The community should be
represented by someone who has been in those meetings and knows how
they work.  
Council Member Stone expressed frustration at the lack of power local
agencies have. He commented they should keep engaging with lobbyists to
make meaningful changes especially for the FAA Reauthorization
Act of 2023
to ensure deadlines and the review process on the FAA noise police are
included. He suggested working on a plan to address urban air mobility to
protect residents. Council Member Stone stated it is important to continue
working directly with SFO on fixing the current approach independently
of
GBAS and having uninterrupted noise monitoring of GBAS approaches. 
Council Member Cormack asked Mr. Allerdice how they can find a member of
the Air Traffic Controller Association who lives in Palo Alto. 
Mr. Allerdice said the key is to get to ones represented on the working
groups. He stated he was an air traffic controller who sat on working groups. 
They were able to go into several communities and have conversations
on
behalf of the communities to get some things done. 
Council Member Cormack asked staff how they should organize their work
going forward in the next step for the city. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
City Manager Shikada suggested continuing to respond to proposals or
changes of concern for the community in addition to ongoing monitoring via
Mr. Kirsch’ s company as well as working with the community members. City
Manager Shikada suggested renewing the request to join the SFO
Roundtable. 
Council Member Cormack asked if someone should be a designated subject
matter expert. 
Council Member Dubois asked about the result of litigation on airplane noise. 
Mr. Kirsch stated the litigation was about NextGen and most of the lawsuits
have been resolved in the FAA’ s favor. Two resolved against the FAA concern
Phoenix and Los Angeles where the FAA was ordered to revise its
environmental documentation. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked about the statutes of limitation on past changes made
by the FAA and if a lawsuit could start several years after a change has been
made. 
Mr. Kirsch stated the statute of limitations is 60 days from when the FAA
takes the action and this is why the FAA is able to avoid litigation. 
Vice Mayor Kou mused about legislation to change that. Vice Mayor Kou
asked if state or local authorities could have some control over aircraft noise
by passing legislation to limit aircraft noise over residential areas. She asked
if they could introduce night curfews or limit the number of planes or aircraft
noise levels. 
Mr. Kirsch stated no. The FAA has exclusive authority over aircraft. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked what would be required to give state or local
governments the ability to control aircraft noise.  
Mr. Kirsch stated that is a matter of the U.S. Constitution unless Congress
were to give up the power over airspace, which will not happen. The federal
government has control over the national airspace. You would not want each
state or locality to define where aircraft can or cannot fly. Conversely, if an
airport wanted to build facilities, it will need state or local environmental
approval that can be used as leverage in securing changes. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
Vice Mayor Kou asked about the FAA environmental
review and what is
needed to eliminate the use of CADEX and require level 2 or level 3
environmental review for all major changes. 
Mr. Kirsch stated under federal law, the FAA is allowed to adopt a series of
CADEXs that require minimal environmental
review. Congress could change
the rules on when the FAA could take advantage of a CADEX. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked how they would lobby that. 
Mr. Kirsch said that would be through the congressional
delegation drafting
precise language limiting the FAA’ s ability to rely on the CADEX instead of
doing an environmental assessment. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if they would want to get into Quiet Skies with other
congressionals. 
Mr. Kirsch said absolutely. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked what legislation should be considered to protect
negative impacts on communities for urban air mobility such as electric
manned or unmanned transportation of people and goods. 
Mr. Kirsch stated the impacts of AAM are speculative. The San Francisco Bay
area is ground zero for a lot of the AAM development in the United States. 
Understanding impacts are in the early stages and we do not know much
yet. Communities
and organizations
looking at aircraft noise should carefully
follow the developments
in the licensing of these aircraft to determine if they
will have significant noise impacts. Congress can direct the FAA to do studies
and set regulations on the noise levels of these new aircraft but the FAA
intends to do that so no new legislation is needed. Until we know what the
impacts are, it is very hard to legislate on that. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if the FAA is following the current NEPA process when
making changes that may affect communities. 
Mr. Kirsch explained the FAA has NEPA regulations they follow in most
instances. He believes the FAA regulations are not adequately protecting
communities and are outdated. Pressure on the FAA to change those would
be appropriate and Congress can direct the FAA to do that. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if grounds for filing a lawsuit against the FAA could be
failure to follow NEPA, flawed analysis or inaccurate statements, and
incomplete information. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
Mr. Kirsch stated those are a good basis. In addition, environmental
statutes
such as those that protect park land and historic sites. Mr. Kirsch repeated
that the deadline for suing is 60 days which can be the time the FAA takes to
implement an action and Congress may need to address the statute of
limitations. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked staff how the City is engaging with lobbyists in terms
of working together to consider and propose state legislation.  
City Manager Shikada responded that they have had no specific proposals to
float with legislators. 
Vice Mayor Kou remarked that looking into expanding the contours might be
helpful. 
City Manager Shikada responded the 65 CNEL threshhold is driven by the
FAA and federal legislation. 
Council Member Tanaka thanked the staff and members of the public for
working on this and Vice Mayor Kou for her questions. Council Member
Tanaka inquired about finding lobbyists who are more specialized in airplane
noise or people who have deeper connections to people in the FAA to gain
more sway in making progress. 
City Manager Shikada stated they periodically will do a new RFP for the
federal lobbyists. He stated this issue is larger than selection of lobbyists in
moving the needle on necessary changes. 
PUBLIC COMMENT
Karen Porter agreed that the city’s ability to do anything meaningful about
jet noise has worsened over the last year. She stated litigation is the only
leverage. In addition to the annoyance of jet noise, the thunder- like noise
generated by San Jose and SFO arrivals exacerbate cardiovascular disease
as documented by public health studies conducted by Stanford and Boston
Schools of Public Health published in 2013. 
Kerry Yarkin asked that no more letters be written to low- level bureaucrats
in the FAA as nothing has happened. The strategy of relying on neighbors to
buy in on sharing the noise did not work. She suggested leveraging the Palo
Alto Airport and not accepting any more FAA grants.  Ms. Yarkin stated the
community is disproportionally burdened by the jet noise and particle
pollution. She asked that action be taken legally. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
Jennifer Landesman stated private citizens of Palo Alto came up with 11 asks
from City Council in 2014. One was to propose an FAA rule change regarding
the jurisdictional and legal problems, a second was to explore a city jet noise
app, and a third was to proactively pursue the unanimous recommendations
of the select committee. Ms. Landesman stated the legislative process is
very influenced by industry interests and can be dishonest and she asked
the Council to focus on what is under their control and to hear from the
citizens. 
Rebecca Ward agreed that many opportunities to litigate were missed and
this is the only avenue. She stated the Council’ s inaction and the quest for a
reasonable solution has failed the community. The problem of concentrated
jet noise and the strategy should be changed, and she suggested hiring
resources that can help. She stated the SFO Roundtable blocks us from
membership and therefore access to FAA and airport resources to help
remediate noise problems.  
Mark Shull suggested the Mayor and Council members build direct
relationships with Ivar Satero and take the case to the San Francisco Airport
Board. 
Darlene Yaplee agreed with asking to join the San Francisco Roundtable. She
thanked the Council for joining ABCx2, hosting GBAS community meetings, 
and pushing SFO to monitor noise in Palo Alto. She believes in changes
made through congressional representatives. 
Los Altos Mayor Anita Enander thanked the staff, consultants, the Council, 
and community members for continuing to work on this problem. She stated
Los Altos community members remain committed to working with Palo Alto
and others to solve the noise problem and reduce environmental
impacts. 
John Perry thanked the Palo Alto City Council and Mayor Enander. He asked
if Palo Alto and other communities could band together to leverage influence
statewide and nationwide. He asked if communities could impose a fine, fee, 
or tax to motivate the airlines to reduce their overflights and if they could
force Congress to limit activity. He asked if communities could enact statutes
or ordinances that force changes to environmental regulations to include
noise levels. 
Rebecca Eisenberg thanked the Council for paying attention to this urgent
matter. She mentions a letter from the Sky Posse of Palo Alto and expressed
disappointment their suggestions were not discussed. She stated private
airplanes cause devastation to the environment. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
3. 278 Lambert, 3040 - 3250 Park, 3201- 3225 Ash & 200 - 404
Prescreening Study Session: Report on Negotiations Between the City
Council Ad Hoc and the Sobrato Organization and Prescreening for
Development Agreement and Rezoning, Seeking Initial Public Input on
Negotiated Terms. Environmental
Assessment: Not a Project. Zoning
District: RM- 30 ( Medium Density Multiple- Family Residence District) and
GM ( General Manufacturing). 
Planning and Development Director Jonathan Lait stated this study session
was to get public input and to conduct preliminary screening for any
development agreement that may be filed. An Ad Hoc consisting of Vice
Mayor Kou and Council Member Dubois met with the Sobrato Organization
for about 6 months to come up with the terms in the report. The Sobrato
Organization
expressed interest in retaining R& D uses in the cannery
building and also townhome development. Director Lait displayed a graphic
of proposed parcels consisting of a portion of the cannery building, a parking
garage, a large building housing R& D and retail space, a 74-unit townhome
development, open space with housing project, the existing Ash Building, 
and the Audi repair building that would be converted to R& D use. There is a
5 million contribution to the affordable housing fund and open space
improvements. If the original project of 91 townhome units was to go
forward, it would include 14 units of deed restricted affordable units. The
concept being presented does not include affordable housing within the
townhome development but it provides for an opportunity of substantially
more affordable housing units if the city could partner with a nonprofit or
other low- income housing provider. Sobrato would contribute 1 acre of land
for low- income housing as well as $ 5 million to help the city work with a
nonprofit provider. Director Lait talked about the city creating a plan for
open space and Matadero Creek naturalization and renovating the cannery
building highlighting its history and including retail space. Future plans
include a robust TDM for commercial uses and an RPP exclusion for
townhomes. The next steps are the Sobrato Organization filing an
application and going through the City’s review process. 
Mayor Burt invited the members of the Ad Hoc committee to comment. 
Council Member DuBois mentioned meeting almost weekly since December
2021. An open session last spring revealed the desire for open space, creek
restoration, and housing. He summarized they are getting 2.25 acres of park
land, 1 acre of affordable housing, $ 1 million for park improvements, and $ 4
million for affordable housing. Council Member DuBois specified this is just
an outline and it has to go through City processes, an EIR, and public
comment. Council Member DuBois believes Sobrato’ s plan is positive for the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
neighborhood
and delivers on the public’ s desire for housing and open space. 
He stressed they are working to preserve and honor the architecturally
interesting components of the building. Council Member DuBois
acknowledged the work of the NVCAP Working Group. 
Mayor Burt invited members of the Council to comment. 
Council Member Stone asked Director Lait for an estimate on how much the
City may receive from impact fees. 
Director Lait did not recall. 
Assistant City Attorney Albert Yang said he could pull that up. 
Council Member Stone asked why the Historic Resources Board ( HRB) is not
included in the process and said he hopes they could be involved. 
Director Lait said the HRB will be included. 
Council Member Stone asked if it was possible to require architects and
engineers who specialize in preservation to be involved. 
Director Lait stated they have a detailed historic analysis of the building
prepared by the City’ s consultant who would be involved in reviewing any
proposed plans. He added a qualified historian architect has been engaged to
work on the project. 
Council Member Stone asked for confirmation that CEQA requires a review of
the historic building as well as the property as a whole. 
Director Lait stated an environmental
analysis will cover the entirety of the
redevelopment
as depicted in the 5 parcels. 
Assistant City Attorney Yang stated that impact fees will total between
500,000 and $ 600,000. A 1% public art fee will depend on construction
costs but are projected at north of $1 million. 
Council Member Stone stated this might be an issue to either continue or
schedule another meeting for the public. He said it would be helpful to have
a side- by-side comparison of the NVCAP goals and priorities of the city. It
would be helpful to better understand under the code what is legally
required of the applicant and a sense if the community is getting a good
deal. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
Vice Mayor Kou referenced the proposed parcels and a bridge over the creek
that would connect to Boulware Park. 
Mayor Burt introduced Applicant Tim Steele. 
Applicant Tim Steele is Senior Vice President of Real Estate Development for
the Sobrato Organization and property owner of the subject property. He
stated what has been presented is a thoughtful compromise of months of
work. He stated they have been working with a historical architect from the
Architectural Resources Group. 
PUBLIC COMMENT
Terry Holzemer, a working group member of NVCAP, expressed concerns
about the historical aspects of the cannery building and the settlement
agreement. He stated a financial analysis should be done. 
Bob Moss urged that the entire building be preserved. He stated the
proposed retail space is too small and should replace the offices and R& D. 
He prefers more open space and park land rather than parking and on- site
low- income housing. 
Julie Lythcott- Haims stated the site was a redlined area where the City put
Black and Asian residents when prevented from living in other
neighborhoods and she hopes this is recognized. 
Rebecca Eisenberg said Sobrato bought homes from families of color under
duress. She stated the Council is selling out the public and natural
environment to avoid a lawsuit. She asked for the public to decide. 
Mirco Horst stated the project impacts include noise, toxic plume, and
misplacement
of the below market rate housing with no access to major
transportation. 
Susan Stansbury stated the creek is a treasure and agrees naturalization is
important. She asked that locally native plants be used. She suggested
working with Grassroots Ecology. For the buildings, she requested the City
require living buildings net- zero or net-positive in energy use. 
Cedric Pitot de La Beaujardiere urged the Council to not downgrade Concept
3 and requested full naturalization
of the creek. He urged the Council to
require the use of native, drought- tolerant, and high habitat value plants, 
green stormwater infrastructure, green building, and net-zero energy
buildings. He mentioned ground source heat pumps as an energy- efficient
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
way to heat and cool homes. He requested the Council require the use of
bird- friendly glazing. He wants to see more retail including a café, 
restaurant, or bar and suggested a European- style town square concept with
a commons area. 
Karen Holman asked if CEQA will analyze the cannery property as a whole, 
how the naturalization
of the creek design will be determined and analyzed
by CEQA, and what the impacts are to the cannery property’ s historic
standing given demolition and new buildings. She suggested comparative
tables of the gains for Sobrato and the City that include financial benefit, 
land use gain and loss, and what is offered versus what is required. She
asked if the City will retain historic expertise for new construction. Ms. 
Holman suggested changing the name of Portage to Thomas Foon Chew
Cannery Way. Another suggestion was to add the property to California and
Palo Alto inventories. 
Peter Drekmeier spoke to the benefits of Matadero Creek for children and
was in favor of naturalizing the creek. Mr. Drekmeier suggesting thinking
about supply and demand in terms of housing and jobs. 
Rebecca Saunders is against giving up valuable zoning for homes to
maintain office profits for a privately held company. She appreciated the
previous comment about toxic plume. 
Jeff Levinsky asked about alternatives to segregating the affordable housing
from the market rate housing. He asked about alternatives to the demolition
of 1/ 3 of a building with immense historic significance. Mr. Levinsky asked
why the financial study has not been made public. He urged the Council to
be open to the public and share relevant information. 
Bill Ross condemned the closed session negotiations. He stated adjacent
property sales are not occurring and leases are not being extended because
of the Sobrato project. He suggested the open space and upgrading of
Matadero Creek be the obligation of the developer. He requested a solution
of dealing with the toxic plume without destroying existing businesses and
residences within and around the neighborhood. 
Aram James expressed concern about gentrification and over- policing. He
asked for 20 percent of any housing development to be set aside for African
Americans. 
Matt Schlegel was in favor of the heat pump water heater program and
reducing carbon emissions. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
Council Member Cormack asked for confirmation that the Council reported
their action on June 21 in response to a comment there was no reportable
action from the closed sessions. Staff affirmed they did. 
Council Member Cormack asked for confirmation that the original Sobrato
plan had 14 affordable housing units at 100 or 120 percent of area median
income. 
Director Lait confirmed the 14 units are 15 percent of the 91 townhomes and
are deed restricted at 100 and 120 percent. 
Council Member Cormack asked how many affordable housing units would
be on the 1-acre proposed area. 
Director Lait stated Wilton Court had 60 studio and 1-bedroom units on ½ 
acre. 
Council Member Cormack estimated 120 units of affordable housing on 1
acre as opposed to 14 units on the SB 330 proposal. 
Director Lait added the units would be more deeply affordable. 
Council Member Cormack defined deeply affordable as people who are
making 60 percent of the average median income could afford these units. 
Mayor Burt stated the street renaming to Thomas Foon Chew is a great idea. 
He spoke to the benefits of being able to negotiate the more affordable
housing. Mayor Burt stated that 10 years ago when the Council received an
unsolicited offer to negotiate for the purchase of 7 acres, the Council
declined to consider the offer and proceeded to have those acres dedicated
as park land. 
Council Member Dubois commented on designing within limitations regarding
Matadero Creek. He stated toxic plume will be a focus of the environmental
impact report. He believed the intent is for 340 Portage to be net-zero. 
Applicant Steele stated the refurbished cannery portion that is currently
vacant would be net-zero with environmentally friendly mechanical and
electric and that targets meet or exceed net-zero. 
Vice Mayor Kou commented on negotiating for deeply affordable housing. 
After hearing from the community, there will be larger units for families in
addition to 1-bedrooms and studios. Vice Mayor Kou commented on the
influence of Thomas Foon Chew in the community, particularly employing all
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
different races. Vice Mayor Kou clarified the definition of redlining as a
discriminatory
practice where services are withheld from potential customers
residing in neighborhoods classified as hazardous to investments and that
have significant numbers of racial and ethnic minorities and low- income
residents. Vice Mayor Kou stated they are being inclusive and diverse. 
Mayor Burt stated the location of the affordable housing site is exceptional
for the community as it would be near to open space and a creek and would
be highly desirable. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
None. 
Public Comment
Anna Stine- Vchino spoke on the importance of climate issues in Palo Alto. 
She hoped the Council would continue the goals of the S/ CAP and implement
specific and effective infrastructure to accommodate
electrification. She
advocated for the implementation
of programs like the heat pump water
heater rollout. She asked for equity and justice in municipal climate policy. 
Anna Kim was in support of the S/ CAP plan, electrification, and that water
heater electrification rollout. 
Moira King stated Palo Alto has failed to meet its climate goals, specifically
energy efficiency goals in 2019 and 2020, and the S/ CAP has not been rolled
out to full effect. She urged the City Council to support electrification. 
Saman de Silva spoke on the 2023 California building code cycle. S/ CAP’s 80
by ’30 goal is not attainable without existing building electrification. With
codes coming up for Council action in the next few months, he hopes that
the Council supports existing building electrification. 
Katie Reuff advocated prioritizing the passage of the S/ CAP including the
heat pump water heater rollout. She urged the Council to be leading figures
in electrification. 
Julia Zeitlin implored the Council to make climate action, the S/ CAP, and
reducing commercial and municipal natural gas use their number one
priority. She urged the Council to implement the most recent electrification
initiative of the Ad Hoc Committee that aims to replace 1000 water heaters
in homes with electric heat pump water heaters and to incentivize the
transition away from natural gas. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
Todd Burke has spoken to proprietors on California Avenue who have
concerns that the tents are coming down and he hopes that action is
reconsidered to bring the tents back. 
Aram James spoke to Action Item # 5 on the August 8 City Council Agenda
which is the approval or non- approval of Andrew Binder as the next police
chief. Mr. James forwarded a letter by Dave Price to the Council. Mr. James
stated City Manager Ed Shikada’ s failure to make the hiring process public is
shameful and an afront to democracy. He urged the Council to not approve
Mr. Binder for chief until the 2 other finalists for police chief are brought to
town so the public can ask questions. 
Maya Perkash expressed support for Palo Alto’ s sustainability
and climate
action plan and its push for electrification. She urged the Council to
implement the recent electrification initiative of the Ad Hoc Committee that
aims to replace water heaters in homes with electric heat pump water
heaters. 
Rebecca Eisenberg encouraged the Council to listen to the young adult
speakers who previously commented. Ms. Eisenberg urged the Council to
propose term limits, impose campaign contribution limits, and put Vote16 on
the ballot. 
Jonathan Erman requested Palo Alto resume free shuttle service. 
Consent Calendar
Council Members Cormack and DuBois registered a no vote on Agenda Item
Number 5. 
Bill Ross commented on Consent Item # 4 in reference to approval of the
minutes for the June 21, 2022, City Council Meeting. He stated a correction
is needed in the Draft Summary Minutes on page 2 where it refers to a
closed session item concerning 340 Portage. Mayor Burt referenced 540
Portage when authorizing staff to authorize a tolling and process agreement
with the Sobrado organization. This makes no reference to anything
disclosed in Study Session Item # 3 or by Council Member Dubois or
presentation by staff. 
Mayor Burt clarified the record was correct when he reported out reportable
action on that item. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
4. Approve Minutes from the May 23, 2022, June 13, 2022, June 20, 2022
and June 21, 2022 City Council Meetings
5. Adoption of Resolution
10060 Authorizing
Use of Teleconferencing
for
Council Meetings During Covid- 19 State of Emergency
6. Approval of a Memorandum
of Agreement with Suez Water Technologies
and Solutions ( Suez) to Assign Suez' Membrane Aerated Biofilm Reactor
MABR) Equipment
and Services to the Future General
Contractor
for
Construction
of the Secondary Treatment Upgrades Capital Improvement
Project ( WQ- 19001) at the Regional Water Quality Control Plant
7. Approval of Amendment Number 2 to Lease between Ada' s Cafe and City
of Palo Alto for the Community Center Cafe at Mitchell Park for 5 Years at
500. 00
per
Month
on
January
1, 2023
with
Annual
3% Increases
Thereafter
8. Adoption
of Interim
Urgency
Ordinance 5560 Extension
Requiring
a
Conditional
Use
Permit
to
Establish
a
Firearms
Dealer
Retail
Use. 
Environmental
Assessment: Exempt under CEQA Guidelines 15061( c)( 3). 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Kou to
approve Agenda Item Numbers 4-8. 
Motion Split for Purpose of Voting
Item 1-4, 6-8 PASSED: 7-0
Item 5 PASSED: 5-2 Cormack, Dubois No
Council Member Cormack, Council Member DuBois spoke to their no votes.  
City Manager Comments
City Manager Shikada spoke on the status of the COVID- 19 pandemic. 
Included in the August 8 agenda is a Summer Recess Informational Report
including information on firefighter graduation, the library summer reading
program, and fire prevention. City Manager Shikada spoke briefly on water
conservation measures and the return of national night out. He said August
is national wellness month. There are community meetings on August 16
and August 18 to gain input on the proposed green building code update. 
City Manager Shikada talked about upcoming business items that will be
discussed on August 8, August 15, August 22, and beyond. 
The Council adjourned to a break from 8: 14 to 8: 30 P.M. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
Action Items
9. PUBLIC HEARING / QUASI- JUDICIAL. 1033 Amarillo Ave [ 22PLN- 00016]: 
Request for a Preliminary Parcel Map with Exceptions to Subdivide a
20,787 square foot R- 1 property into two ( 2) lots, where Lot 1 will be
10,668. 50 square feet and Lot 2 will be 10,118. 77 square feet. Exception
is for minimum lot width and maximum lot size. Zoning District R- 1 Single
Family Residential. 
Director Lait invited Senior Planner Emily Foley to make the presentation. 
Senior Planner Foley stated the exemption is to allow the lots to be larger
than the maximum size of 9,999 sf and for the lots to be narrower than the
minimum lot width of 60 ft. The 2 lots would be slightly over 10,000 sf and
about 53 feet wide. The Council considered 2 plans at a prescreening on
October 25, 2021. The project went to the PTC in April 2022 and did not
receive a recommendation for approval; however, staff recommendation is
to move forward with the approval. Planner Foley listed 7 reverse findings
for the subdivision that if met, the subdivision would be denied. There are 4
exception findings that must be met. Staff recommends the City Council
move forward with the Record of Land Use Action to approve the project
based on the findings and subject to conditions of approval. The alternate
action is to direct staff to return with findings for denial and likely go on the
Consent Calendar. 
Applicant Ted O’Hanlon introduced himself as the consulting project
executive working on behalf of the owners, American Pacific International
Capital, based in San Francisco. They concur with the Staff Report and the
recommendations
to use the existing curb cuts. The current tenants in the 4
cottages are on 1-year leases and then will move to monthly leases. The
intent is to allow for future development of the site and the first step is to
subdivide it. There could be 1 home and 1 ADU on each of the 2 lots and
possibly a junior ADU on each lot for a total of 6 units. He stated creating a
new cottage cluster was not feasible. 
Planning and Transportation
Commissioner
Doria Suma had nothing to add
and stated she was available for questions. 
City Manager Shikada stated if the Council wanted to lay this item over, he
would recommended next week. 
PUBLIC COMMENT
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
Joe Hirsch stated he was confused by the staff report. He stated it looks like
affordable housing will be lost with this project. 
Rebecca Eisenberg agreed that the staff report was confusing. She asked for
clarity on what was being proposed. She found it odd for there to be an
analysis for an exception that was given. She stated cottage clusters are
important to Palo Alto as they provide affordable housing opportunities. Ms. 
Eisenberg opposed the idea of knocking down cottage clusters. 
Aram James thought after the 1-year lease ended for the current tenants of
the property only yearly leases could be offered. He asked if the previous
tenants got relocation monies. 
Council Member DuBois asked if the issue of 1 driveway versus 2 driveways
is settled. 
Senior Planner Foley said the applicant agreed to keep the current single
driveway and is condition # 5 in the draft conditions of approval. 
Council Member DuBois asked why the PTC voted against approval. 
Commissioner
Suma stated the PTC majority was uncertain why there was a
request for a lot division in advance of a project and felt it would be better
for the City and residents to have more specificity. They were not able to
make preliminary parcel map findings # 2 or section findings # 2 and # 4. She
mentioned 5 policies in their land use section. Exception finding # 2 did not
make sense and they could not agree with staff on finding # 4. 
Council Member Stone referenced a line on page 61 of the staff report about
topology and asked if the staff recommendation
has changed since hearing
from the applicant they do not intend to retain the cottage cluster. 
Director Lait stated the subdivision does not result in a change to the
cottage cluster but if they were to be demolished and replaced, it would not
reflect the current topology. 
Council Member Stone asked if the policies to retain current housing prefer
retaining affordable housing. 
Director Lait stated he would have to review the comp plan. 
Council Member Stone asked if it were possible to require affordability or
displacement
assurance under the conditions of approval. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 21 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
Director Lait was not sure about the displacement
piece. Affordability is not a
requirement. 
City Attorney Molly Stump stated that state rent control law applies. 
Council Member Stone asked if they could place specific conditions on
approval more restrictive than city code or state law. 
City Attorney Stump stated that it depended on what Council wanted to do
with their conditions. 
Council Member Stone asked the applicant how much the rent was when the
property was purchased. Currently it is $ 4000 per month. 
Applicant O’Hanlon stated the rent then was approximately what it is now. 
One unit was occupied when the property was purchased. He addressed the
PTC concerns and said they did not want to proceed with the cost of
architectural and planning drawings before getting the exception granted. 
MOTION:  Council Member Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Kou
to continue this Item to August 8, 2022. 
MOTION PASSED/ FAILED: 5-2; Cormack, Tanaka No
10. Adoption of Resolutions: ( 1) Placing a Business Tax on the November
2022 Ballot; ( 2) Placing a Measure Affirming the Natural Gas Utility
Transfer on the November 2022 Ballot; and ( 3) Establishing Advisory
Spending Guidelines for Business Tax Proceeds. 
Assistant Director of Administrative
Services Christine Paras presented on
Council matters of resolutions pertaining to the business tax and a measure
to affirm the natural gas utility transfer. She stated changing the square
footage rate changes the revenue for the tax measure from $ 18 million to
15.5 million. When presenting remaining milestones for the Council, she
highlighted the due date for the County Registrar of Voters is August 12. 
Mayor Burt stated the Council recommends the first 10,000 sf of all business
be exempt from the rate and they also recommend a standard monthly rate
of $0.10/ sf. He added that nonprofits are exempt. 
Council Member Eric Filseth explained how 10,000 sf is an appropriate target
and added the drop in revenue is concerning and suggested the Council look
at whether $ 0.10 is the best number for that threshold. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 22 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
PUBLIC COMMENT
Alex Comsak does not support any BT proposal burdening businesses, 
especially small businesses. He stated home- run businesses are not affected
by the proposals. Larger businesses would pay about 1 percent of their rent
which is nothing compared to overall rent which has been increasing 5
percent per year since 2010. He stated the BT proposal is generous for
businesses and the 5 percent cap increase could be higher since current
inflation is higher. 
Greg Schmid spoke for Paul Machado, Joe Hirsch, Mary Gallagher, and Jo
Ann Mandinach and stated business must pay their fair share of local taxes. 
He stated job centers need a variety of local government services and
residents pay the bulk of local government costs through multiple taxes. 
Stanford University should contribute a fair share to local government costs. 
Nadia Naik supports the business tax. She stated there is a need for grade
separation to reduce traffic congestion. 
Bob Moss stated the business tax is long overdue and encouraged passage
of the tax. He stated the rate for larger businesses is too low and should be
at least $ 0.15/ sf. He requested consideration of lowering the threshold of
exemption to 4000 sf. 
Terry Holzemer stated the Palo Altans for Sensible Zoning Regulation is in
support of a business tax and large commercial businesses should pay their
fair share. He said safety of rail crossings is essential to school children. He
asked for a vote of yes on the business tax. 
Aram James cited Miriam Green v. the City of Palo Alto and asked about the
delay in paying out the funds. He asked what the current amount spent in
legal costs to delay that litigation is. He is in favor of the business tax but
asked for clarity. 
Todd Burke expressed concern about vacant commercial property. He asked
the Council to look at the economic development implications. 
Mirco Horst asked the Council to consider exceptions for small businesses. 
Cedric Pitot de La Beaujardiere supports option B and stated transportation
is important to meeting climate goals. He expressed concern that all the
transportation funding would go to grade separation and asked that some
transportation
dollars go to decreasing single occupancy cars, increasing
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 23 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
biking and walking, improving bike connections, supporting groups with
programs offering transit passes to low- wage workers, and incentivize and
facilitate bike and e-bike ridership. He supports using funds to support
housing and services for the unhoused and the measure to clarify and
authorize the practice of transferring funds from the utility to the City’s
general fund. 
Jonathan Erman asked the Council to clarify that these measures do not go
into effect immediately. He stated the Silicon Valley Leadership Group will
never be happy with anything proposed and it would be difficult to get them
on board and the focus needs to be on local interests. 
Mary Gloner expressed appreciation for a business tax resolution where
funds would be invested in services that foster protective factors for youth
including safe rail crossing funding, considering the City’s history of deaths
along the railway. 
Shashank Joshi was in favor of the measure. He stated it will allow for safe
modernization
of train crossings. He stated studies have shown the most
effective measures include enhancements
to the Intrusion Detection System
IDS) system, proper fencing with winglets on both sides of Alma, and
proper signage. 
Rebecca Eisenberg agreed to the need for a business tax to support
community services and requiring big business to pay its fair share but she
opposed the proposed tax that lets the biggest businesses and employers
and billionaire landlords off the hook. Ms. Eisenberg stated there are
Supreme Court of California federal or state decisions that uphold any tax on
tenant office size. She stated this tax is likely unconstitutional. She stated
the tax is regressive because of the cap. She asked the Council to fix the tax
to a big business tax. 
Hamilton Hitchings stated the business tax is 1 percent of the total rent
businesses pay each year while business rents in Palo Alto have been
increasing 5 percent per year. He stated businesses need to pay their fair
share. He stated businesses pay 1/ 3 of the property taxes due to a loophole
exploited in Prop 13. Mr. Hitchings stated this tax is needed for affordable
housing, public safety, and train crossing safety. He supports the Ad Hoc’s
alternate business tax measure, Attachment B, that is more favorable to
small and medium businesses. 
Adina Levin supports funding for public transportation including grade
separations and affordable housing near transit. She agrees with seeking
voter approval of a square footage- based tax that exempts smaller sites. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 24 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
She supports use of funds to support Transportation
Management
Association programs that provide access to sustainable transportation
for
workers. 
Keith Reckdahl believes the tax is fair and appropriate and provides
significant benefits while minimizing impacts to businesses. He stated the
business tax will provide funding for affordable housing and improve
transportation and public safety staffing and it is fair for businesses to help
pay for these costs. 
Andie Reed asked why other cities in the Bay Area have a business tax and
Palo Alto does not. She stated all businesses should be paying equitably to
run the City. She stated the decision should be up to the residents. 
Alan Kaiser questioned the role of the California municipality institution in
providing the results people want. 
Mayor Burt asked for feedback on the Ad Hoc Committee recommendations
including continuing with the gas transfer fee ballot measure and the
business tax or just one of the two. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the transit occupancy tax had a sunset
date. 
Assistant Director Paras responded it did not. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the Council should pick a lower rate and
increase it later if needed. She asked what is the maximum amount an
employer would pay under alternate attachment B of the Ad Hoc’s proposal. 
Assistant Director Paras replied they would have to look that up. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the Ad Hoc’s new proposal came about as
a result of an agreement or as a recommendation. 
Mayor Burt stated the business community has not elected to negotiate with
the Ad Hoc or City staff and this resulted in a recommendation. 
Council Member Cormack referenced packet page 119 and the assumption
the CPI will always go up and asked what would happen during a period of
deflation. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 25 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
City Attorney Stump replied the Council can adjust the rate as long as it is a
downward adjustment. There is no automatic trigger but Council could make
that choice. 
Council Member Cormack referenced page 132 regarding transportation. She
asked if the Council could use the funds for things such as a shuttle system, 
TMA, and a bike lane. 
City Attorney Stump stated Council has authority through the budget
process to make decisions on expenditure of the funds. 
City Manager Shikada stated the expectations of what the resolution states
should be consistent with follow- up from staff in the future. 
Council Member Cormack stated she would like to see the transportation
section of the resolution written more broadly. She asked for reassurance
that this is being structured in a way that protects the city while giving
people a reasonable way to challenge the assessment. 
City Attorney Stump stated it is in the City’ s interest to allow taxpayers to
appeal through a vigorous administrative process before going to court and
steps have been drafted to allow that to occur. 
Council Member Cormack stated putting the utility transfer on is a priority
and data reflects that it is likely to pass. She was unsure about deciding
tonight on Attachment B and repeated her suggestion of starting at a lower
level and modifying it in a couple years if needed. 
Council Member Dubois asked for clarification on the exemptions under state
law to a square footage tax. 
Administrative
Services Director Nose stated that business tax state law
would identify the businesses that would be exempt. Unit of measure does
not matter, and she stated nonprofits would be exempt. 
Assistant Director Paras added that educational, hospital, and financial
institutions would be exempt. 
Council Member Dubois asked if that was included in the ballot measure
language. 
City Attorney Stump responded that they did not make them a part of the
voter- approved ordinance except to state that exemptions from the tax
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 26 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
include businesses exempted by state or federal law. The exemptions are
not described. She recommended
an explanatory document on the side. 
Council Member Dubois stated there was no interest in business leadership
to engage with the Ad Hoc Committee. He stated at 10,000, they are
excluding over 50 percent of businesses. He stated he is in favor of the
0.12 level with the 10,000 sf exclusion if there is no agreement with the
business community. He would accept the $0.10 if they were to agree. He is
in favor of doing the business tax without the gas transfer and suggests
discussion of the gas transfer be an action item next Monday. Council
Member Dubois did not support broadening the uses. 
Mayor Burt stated they have expended their affordable housing funds. 
Regarding transportation
funding focusing on grade separations, there are
federal and state funding opportunities. It is imperative local share funding
is available to be eligible for state and federal dollars. Regarding public
safety, a decision was made in June to restore to full strength the police
department including social workers and psychiatric care workers but there
is no adequate funding past 2 years without this revenue stream. Mayor Burt
stated there would be no tax collection until January 2024 with the full tax
rate beginning in 2025. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked about the resolution adopting advisory spending
guidelines and what number of votes is needed if a future Council decided to
change the funding from what is currently indicated. 
City Attorney Stump stated a simple majority would be needed and the
decision is made every year by the Council when setting the budget. 
Council Member Tanaka stated the economy is in a recession and a bear
market. He stated the utility tax is similar to a business tax. He stressed the
importance of spending within means. He suggested revisiting the business
tax at a later time. Council Member Tanaka made a motion to move forward
on the utility tax and revisit the business tax later. 
Mayor Burt stated he did not see a second. He referenced the hotel tax and
it was decided by simple majority those funds would go exclusively to the
infrastructure master plan and 3 different Councils have upheld this. 
Council Member Dubois reiterated full implementation
would be in 2025. 
Council Member DuBois moved to adopt Ad Hoc alternative as listed in
Attachment B at $0.12 a square foot, bring revised Attachment C that
accounts for gas transfer not being brought forward, and bring the gas
transfer item to Council on August 8, 2022, as an Action Item. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 27 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
Council Member Filseth seconded but amended the rate to $0.11. 
Council Member DuBois accepted the change to $0.11. 
Mayor Burt accepts $ 0.11 with the understanding
if the coalition opposing
the tax comes back with mutually acceptable terms, they will return to the
Council next Monday. 
Council Member Tanaka asked what the average commercial rent is in the
City. 
Ms. Paras replied it is about $ 7/ sf. 
Council Member Tanaka referenced page 94, Recital A. He asked how Recital
A helps and if it does not, he suggested striking it. 
Mayor Burt questioned what sentence Council Member Tanaka was referring
to and read they do not contribute through a local business tax. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Council could be more specific on
Recital C about making sure that funds will actually be used to help the
people actually paying for this. 
City Attorney Stump stated the Recital complies with the law by accurately
describing the form of the tax. She stated the advisory spending guidelines
are Attachment C. 
Council Member Tanaka referenced 2.37.020 on packet page 98 and talked
about making it simpler. 
City Attorney Stump stated businesses describe their own size which is
subject to double- checking by City staff and audit. 
Ms. Nose stated the City’s records would potentially be for the full footprint
of the building. A building may have shared occupancy and this calculation
provides direction on how that may be split and can be reported under
penalty of perjury by the business. 
City Attorney Stump stated it is standard for taxpayers to self- report subject
to checking. 
Council Member Tanaka referenced 2.37.080 on packet page 101. He asked
about having a 1-for-1 offset instead of the 50- percent offset. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 28 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
City Attorney Stump replied that was a policy decision and directed by
Council. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed a 1-for-1 versus a 50-percent offset on
Section 2.37.080. 
City Attorney Stump clarified that the TOT offset is proposed to be 1-for-1
and the discretionary sales and use tax offset is a percentage with a cap. 
Council Member Tanaka referenced Section 2.37.110 on packet page 103
and asked why businesses submit the same form every quarter. 
City Attorney Stump stated there is flexibility if the business wanted to pay
annually. 
Council Member Tanaka referenced 2.37.220, Confidentiality of Records. He
felt they should use the data they have already versus having to do more. 
Council Member Tanaka read Section A of 2.37.270 on packet page 110 and
stated this gives businesses an administrative
burden. 
Council Member DuBois stated staff have done a good job. 
Council Member Cormack stated she will not support. 
Administrative Services Director Nose stated recalculating the alternative at
0.11, staff recommend Council give staff direction to revise the ordinance, 
the ballot question, and Attachment
C and bring those documents back for
final adoption on August 8. She stated the motion would need to be
reworded. 
City Attorney Stump clarified that if there are additional discussions in the
business community resulting in a new proposal, Staff has the authority to
draft that up and bring it forward on August 8 as an Action Item. 
MOTION:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member
Filseth to: 
A. Direct staff to bring forth final documents on Consent based on Ad Hoc
alternative as listed in Attachment B and adjusting the rate to $0.11
cents per square foot; 
B. Direct staff to bring back a revised Attachment C that accounts for gas
transfer not being brought forward; and
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 29 of 29
Sp.) City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  08/ 01/2022
C. Bring the gas transfer item to Council on August 8, 2022, as an Action
Item. 
MOTION PASSED/ FAILED:  5-2; Tanaka, Cormack no
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements
Vice Mayor Kou stated she attended the Santa Clara County Cities
Association Special Board Meeting on June 23. She stated the Council should
propose to the Cities Association that they list out all the different cities and
how they voted. She also attended a meeting for the Silicon Valley Regional
Interoperability Agency and they are following SB 1000 legislation pertaining
to law enforcement
agencies’ encryption and radio communications
and
following the provision for reimbursements
for unfunded state mandates. 
There is a cost to unencrypting the radios due to staff time. 
Mayor Burt stated he visited 3 sister cities plus 2 cities in Denmark on a
workcation paid for by himself. They discussed work being done on climate
matters and he will be composing a summary for the Council, S/ CAP, and Ad
Hoc. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11: 11 P.M. 
