CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 Special Meeting 
 
May 16, 2022 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present:  
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
Filseth  
Closed Session 
1. CONFERENCE WITH REAL PROPERTY NEGOTIATORS Authority: 
Government Code Section 54956.8 Property: 445 Bryant Street, 
Assessor’s Parcel Number 120-15-107 Negotiating Party: JSRFIT 
LLC, a California limited liability company d.b.a. Form Fitness City 
Negotiators: Ed Shikada and Kiely Nose Subject of Negotiations: 
Lease Price and Terms of Payment 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
DuBois to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1 Filseth absent 
PUBLIC COMMENT 
Rebecca Eisenberg reminded the Council that in Chapter Five of the League 
of California Cities Brown Act regarding Closed Sessions that the nature of 
the lease was not listed as an item that should be held in closed session.  
She wanted to understand what the proposed development was. 
Mayor Burt remarked the applicant was Form Fitness City. 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:00 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:10 PM P.M. 
There were no announcements for the public. 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:00 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:10 PM P.M. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
There were no announcements for the public. 
 
Special Orders of the Day 
2. Proclamation Recognizing National Police Week - May 15-21, 2022 
and National Peace Officers’ Memorial Day - May 15, 2022 
Council Member Stone read the proclamation into record. 
Police Chief Jonsen stated it was an honor to receive the proclamation in 
honor of the men and women of the Palo Alto Police Department. 
3. Proclamation Recognizing Emergency Medical Services Week May 
15-21, 2022 
Council Member Cormack read the proclamation into the record. 
Fire Chief Geo Blackshire mentioned the Palo Alto Fire Emergency Medical 
Services (EMS) services was established shortly after President Ford 
authorized National EMS Week.  For the year 2021, Palo Alto Fire EMS had 
a 33 percent rate on return of spontaneous circulation when the national 
average was between 20 and 25 percent.  That success was accomplished 
through the collaboration with the Palo Alto Police Department, the 
Emergency Services Dispatch Center and the Palo Alto Fire Department. 
EMS Chief Kim Rodgrick acknowledged the struggles the COVID-19 
Pandemic posed on services and training.  The pandemic imposed a 
change to State regulations to allow EMS trained individuals to administer 
vaccination shots and help over capacity hospitals. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor Burt announced that the agenda will be reordered so that Item 13 
will be moved to the end of the agenda.  
PUBLIC COMMENT 
Rob Levitsky explained the Castilleja School project started with five 
Variances, but the neighborhood educated itself and provided valuable 
feedback regarding the project.  At the most recent Planning and 
Transportation Commission (PTC) meeting, the Commission approved to 
allow the school to begin at 450 students but refrained on additional 
increases until neighborhood impact could be assessed.  The Planning and 
Development Services Department in their Staff report for Council’s 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
upcoming meeting actively lobbied against the recommendation made by 
the PTC. 
Linda Jolley advocated that a minimum wage worker living in Palo Alto 
could not afford to rent a small bedroom.  Many folks were living in vehicles 
and the City continued to harass them by issuing frequent tow warnings.  
She requested the City provide all information on the current policy to her. 
Neva Yarkin remarked that the City needed to do better with respect to 
environmental issues.  Castilleja School wanted to expand its school which 
would cause more Greenhouse Gasses to be instilled into the atmosphere.  
Also, the many tons of cement needed for the project omitted thousands 
of tons of carbon dioxide.  These actions did not support the City’s climate 
plan. 
Elizabeth Weal, a member of the League of Women Voters, announced the 
League provided a petition with signatures requesting the Council pass a 
$500 cap on campaign contributions for City Council candidates. 
Katherine Miller, a member of the League of Women Voters, remarked the 
League presented three local campaign financial proposals.  Passing all 
three proposals was the best approach to local campaign finance reform 
in a comprehensive manner. 
Karen Harwell supported a $500 cap on local campaign contributions.  
Current law allowed up to $4,900 for Palo Alto City candidates which was 
ten times higher than the allowable amount for Santa Clara County 
Supervisors. 
Jean Lythcott, a member of the League of Women Voters, stated with the 
contribution cap of $4,900, the City was inviting only the wealthy to run 
for City Council positions.  A $500 cap on donations would likely increase 
diversity of Council candidates. 
Alice Smith shared since the year 2016, the cost to run for City Council 
had risen 66 percent which far outpaced inflation.  It was time for the City 
Council to pass a $500 cap on local campaign donations. 
Lisa Ratner, a member of the League of Women Voters, echoed previous 
speaker’s comments to pass a campaign cap of $500.  Contributions to 
the Palo Alto City Council candidates were dominated by several large 
donors. 
Nancy Neff represented the Palo Alto Clean Money Campaign and 
explained the campaign worked to reduce the influence of money in 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
politics to reduce corruption or the appearance of corruption.  The Clean 
Money Campaign urged the City Council to pass a $500 cap on campaign 
donations. 
Judy Kleinberg remarked as a former City Council Member and Mayor, she 
voluntarily limited her campaign amount to $20,000.  The increase in 
campaign costs had deterred folks from running for City Council.  She 
supported campaign finance reform and a cap of $500 on donations.  A 
cap encouraged small donors to engage in the public process. 
Liz Jensen, a member of the League of Women Voters, found it anti-
democratic to leave the City Council donation cap at the State’s default 
level of $4,900.  She echoed the request to pass a $500 cap for donations 
before the November 2022 elections. 
Elaine Elbizrl, a member of the California Clean Money Campaign, 
supported a $500 cap on campaign donations. 
Michael Morganstern believed the current City Council was one of the best 
Councils money could buy.  He urged Council to represent the people, not 
big donors and pass a $500 cap on campaign donations. 
Roger Smith listed the names of neighbors and former Mayors who helped 
reduce the City Council from nine members to seven members.  Also, they 
encouraged a more accountable, more effective and more productive Palo 
Alto City Government.  He encouraged the Council to be more productive. 
Romola Georgia was horrified by the anti-democratic influence of money 
on the City’s elections. She strongly supported the League of Women 
Voters proposal to cap campaign donations at $500. 
Steven Branz shared he used to organize the Waverley Street block parties 
and folks running for Council were always invited to attend.  He believed 
that type of engagement should continue and supported the League Of 
Women Voters proposals for campaign finance reform.  The limit would 
increase local donations and public participation. 
Aram James was not supportive of a cap on local campaign donations.  He 
encouraged Rebecca Eisenberg to run for City Council.  He expressed 
frustration with Council Member Cormack and her unwavering support for 
the Palo Alto Police Department. 
Rebecca Eisenberg thanked Mr. James for his comment.  She shared she 
ran for a City Council position in the year 2020 and believed campaigns 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
should be publicly funded.  She supported the previous speaker's 
comments to place a cap on local campaign donations. 
Math Schlegel commented his home had been free of fossil fuels for over 
5-weeks.  He emphasized the behavior of folks was causing detrimental 
impacts to nature.  The City must stop burning fossil fuels in the next 3- 
to 5-years to stop mass extinction. 
Kari Yarkin remarked she is a neighbor of Castilleja School and was 
supportive of the school until the neighborhood began to feel the impacts 
regarding traffic and added weeknight events.  Castilleja School continued 
to violate their existing Conditional Use Permit (CUP) and was asking for 
increases in various areas that would impact the neighborhood more.  She 
emphasized now was the time for the City of Palo Alto to say not to the 
new Castilleja CUP. 
Winter Dellenbach announced that folks needed to water their trees during 
a drought.  She believed the League Of Women Voters’ proposal was 
neither practical, nor realistic because many types of donations were 
exempt under the proposed cap. 
Fred Balin mentioned several times contribution caps had been raised and 
neither time had they been approved by the Council. The League of 
Women Voters was requesting one component of their proposals to be 
adopted by the Council. He encouraged the Council to adopt the proposal. 
Julie Beer supported the $500 campaign contribution limit for the City 
Council elections. She expressed concern about larger donors and their 
influence on candidates. 
Rita Vrhel highlighted that Castilleja School had violated its current CUP 
and the City did nothing about it. She requested the City place the project 
on hold and differ the item to the Santa Clara County Civic Grand Jury. 
Mary Sylvester aligned her comments with Ms. Dellenbach and other 
voices regarding transparency.  City Staff continued to hide evidence and 
findings about Castilleja School from the public. 
Mora Oommen thanked the City and Staff for a well-attended and safe 
May Fete Parade. 
Council Member DuBois remarked public comment was the time for the 
public to speak about policy.  When personal attacks are made, the 
comments are ignored and not considered during deliberations. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Mayor Burt read a portion of the City's response regarding the incident 
that took place in Buffalo, New York. 
The Council took a moment of silence on behalf of the victims. 
Consent Calendar 
Mayor Burt acknowledged the memorandum that highlighted amendments 
to Item 4, Item 12 and Item 11. 
Council Member Cormack, DuBois registered a no vote on Agenda Item 
Number 5. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 6. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 4-12. 
MOTION PASSED Items 4, 7-12:  6-0-1 Filseth Absent  
MOTION PASSED Items 5:  4-2-1 Cormack, DuBois no, Filseth Absent 
MOTION PASSED Items 6:  5-1-1 Tanaka No, Filseth Absent 
4. 
Approve Minutes from the May 2, 2022 City Council Meeting 
5. 
Adoption of Resolution 10037 Authorizing Use of Teleconferencing 
for Council Meetings During Covid-19 State of Emergency 
6. 
Approval of Amendment One to Six (6) Enterprise System SAP On-
Call Professional Services Contracts with: 1) Avertra Corporation, 
C20174583A; 2) Peloton Group, LLC., C20174583B; 3) Etech-360, 
Inc., C20174583C; 4) V3iT Consulting, Inc., C20174583D; 5) IT 
Resonance, Inc., C20174583E; and 6) Techlink Systems, Inc., 
C20174583F, to Increase the Level of Services that May be Provided 
and Increase the Combined not-to-exceed Amount from $350,000 
Annually to $650,000 Annually in Year 2 and $1,650,000 Annually 
in each of Contract Years 3 through 5, for all Six (6) Contracts, 
Bringing the New Contract not-to-exceed Combined Amount Across 
all Six (6) Contracts to $5,950,000 Over a Five-Year Period, for 
provision of Department-Specific SAP Solutions 
7. 
Approval of Contract Number C22183804 With Jacobs Engineering 
Group, Inc, (Jacobs) in the Total Amount Not-to-Exceed $880,569 
to Provide Engineering Services for the Joint Intercepting Sewer (JIS 
Rehab.) Rehabilitation (Phase 1) at the Regional Water Quality 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Control Plant from the Plant Repair, Retrofit, and Equipment 
Replacement capital project (WQ-19002) in the Wastewater 
Treatment Fund 
8. 
Approval of Contract No. C22183905 with Prime Government 
Solutions, Inc. for an Amount Not to Exceed $136,892 Over a Term 
of Approximately Five-Years through June 30, 2027 for the Provision 
of Cloud-based Agenda, Meeting, and Commission Management and 
Automation Software 
9. 
Adoption of Resolution 10038 for Senate Bill 1, the Road Repair 
and Accountability Act, for Fiscal Year 2023, Providing the Street 
Maintenance Project List for Capital Improvement Program Project 
PE-86070 
10. 
Approval of Amendment Number Two to Contract No. C20175911 
with Labyrinth Solutions, Inc., to extend the Contract Term through 
October 21, 2022 at No Added Cost, for Information Technology 
Professional Services, Cloud Computing Hosting and Support 
Services, and As-Needed SAP Application Technical / Functional 
Support Services. 
11. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of Ordinance 5549 Amending Palo 
Alto Municipal Code (PAMC) Title 18 (Zoning), Chapters 18.04 
(Definitions), 18.16 (Neighborhood, Community, and Service 
Commercial (CN, CC and CS) Districts), 18.18 (Downtown 
Commercial (CD) Districts) and 18.30 (A) and (C) the Retail and 
Ground Floor Combining Districts. Environmental Review: Exempt 
Under California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines 
Section 15061(b)(3) until December 16, 2022. (FIRST READING: 
May 2, 2022: PASSED 7-0) 
12. 
SECOND READING: Parks and Recreation Commission Recommend 
Adopting Ordinance 5550 to Amend the Foothills Nature Preserve 
Attendance Range to 400-600 Guests (FIRST READING: May 2, 
2022: PASSED 7-0) 
Council Member Cormack remarked that given the number of in-person 
events being held.  There was no longer a need to support the resolution 
listed in Item Five. 
Council Member DuBois echoed Council Member Cormack's comment 
regarding Item 5. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Council Member Tanaka stated Item Six was an astounding amount of 
money to be approved on the Consent Calendar. 
MOTION PASSED/FAILED:  7-0 
City Manager Comments 
 
 
City Manager Ed Shikada announced the flag at all City facilities had been 
lowered to half-mast in recognition of the millionth death mark of the 
COVID-19 Pandemic.  There has been an increase in COVID-19 cases 
locally, regionally and nationally.  COVID-19 testing was available at local 
facilities and those were listed on the City's website.  The City celebrated 
the official opening of the Junior Museum and Zoo as well as Rinconada 
Park.  The Palo Alto Police Department and City officials would be holding 
a short ceremony on May 17, 2022 in honor of the three officers killed in 
the line of duty.  Movie night in the park was to begin on May 20, 2022 at 
Mitchell Park and run through July 22, 2022.  On May 20 and May 21, 
2022, Bike to Wherever Days will have energizing stations throughout the 
City in renegotiation of Bike Month.  Upcoming items for the May 23, 2022 
City Council meeting included Castilleja's project review.  He requested 
that Council Members mark a placeholder for a potential special June 21, 
2022 City Council meeting. 
Action Items 
13. 
Approve a Fiscal Year 2023 Program for Domestic Recycling of Mixed 
Paper and Mixed Rigid Plastics; Approve a Budget Appropriation in 
the Refuse Fund Fiscal Year 2023 Operating Budget; Direct Staff to 
Negotiate a Corresponding Contract Amendment with GreenWaste 
of Palo Alto for Program Costs in an Amount Not to Exceed $1.2M   
(7:05 – 7:45 PM) 
ACTION: Item was continued to a future meeting  
14. Adopt Resolution 10039 and Resolution 10040 Authorizing the 
City Manager to Continue to Close California Avenue from El Camino 
Real to Park Boulevard, and Ramona Street between Hamilton 
Avenue and University Avenue Until December 31, 2023 and Direct 
Staff to Implement Specific Access Lanes and Perimeter Rules 
Chief Transportation Official Philip Kamhi noted the item was for temporary 
closures only and not for permanent closures.  As the City begins to study 
the long-term closures for the streets, Staff will be conducting a California 
Environmental Impact Report (CEQA) as well as a traffic study. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Senior Transportation Planner Ozzy Acre reported the item was a 
continuation from the February 28, 2022 City Council meeting.  On 
September 13, 2021, the Council authorized an extension of the street 
closures through June 2022.  Council then extended the closures through 
December 2023. At the May 9, 2022 Council meeting, the Council provided 
direction to Staff on the proposed permanent parklet standards and 
programs.  The transition from the pilot parklet program to a permanent 
parklet program was happening parallel with the extension of the 
temporary street closures and evaluation of long-term solutions.  Adoption 
of the proposed resolution would allow the City Manager the authority to 
temporarily close portions of California Avenue and Ramona Street until 
December 31, 2023.  Also, the resolution authorized Staff to implement 
specific access and perimeter rules.  For clarification, parklet was the area 
identified immediately adjacent to the curb.  On street dining refers to 
dining on a closed street.  As the City moved through the process, Staff 
would continue to refine the regulations associated with the public space.  
Staff’s recommendations balanced activities while managing risk and 
safety and preserved the flexibility for long-term closures.  Staff 
recommended installing a dedicated 16-foot emergency access lane down 
the middle of California Avenue with a 10-foot two-way bike lane 
superimposed on top.  For Ramona Street, Staff recommended installing 
a 16-foot-wide emergency lane with a 20-foot wide lane in front of Cardinal 
Hotel with a 10-foot wide bike lane superimposed on top.  Staff also 
recommended all restaurants with on street dining install a barrier to 
prevent guests from entering the bike lane.  Also, Staff recommended only 
small tents and umbrellas be used in the on-street dining areas with the 
exception of large tents during inclement weather months.  Staff continued 
to work collaboratively with other City departments to improve the 
aesthetics and place making of the two streets. 
City Manager's Office Kara Apple reported as part of the public 
engagement process, Staff created a survey to solicit feedback on the 
extension of the temporary closed street as well as the program 
enhancements.  Staff received 648 responses from the community survey 
with 573 respondents indicating they enjoyed the outdoor parklet with 75 
indicating they did not enjoy the parklets.  The community expressed 
words of support for the sidewalk and closed street dining and retail.  Also, 
the community supported additional enhancements for the existing 
program.  Many respondents indicated they visited the Downtown and 
California Avenue areas one to two times a month and/or per week.  Also, 
many respondents noted they frequently visited restaurants, bars and 
retail in the area. A survey was sent out to the businesses in the area and 
40 responses were received.  The survey asked how supportive the 
businesses were to additional enhancements and retail was more 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
supportive than restaurants.  There was an even split on whether the 
businesses would support a fee for use of the public right-of-way. 
Mr. Acre highlighted a chart that showed the year over year changes for 
the past 2-years for Sales Tax from July to December for the California 
Avenue and University Avenue Districts.  The next steps were to work with 
businesses to help bring them into compliance if the resolution was 
adopted by Council.  Engagement with businesses and the community 
would continue throughout the process.  Staff would continue working on 
the street closures and long-term recommendations and would present 
those to the Council in late 2022, early 2023. 
Council Member DuBois wanted to understand the need for a dedicated 
emergency lane versus movable furniture in the space. 
Interim Deputy Fire Marshall Stephen Lindsey explained the areas were 
surrounded by many buildings that did not have sprinklers.  Having quick 
access to the area was paramount for the safety of the community. 
Council Member DuBois inquired if fire access could be managed from the 
allies behind California Avenue. 
Mr. Lindsey remarked the department needed both primary and secondary 
access to the buildings.  Having access to both sides of the building was 
important and the 16-feet lane was a reduction from the 20-feet required 
by the California Fire Code. 
Council Member DuBois asked if Staff considered no bike lanes in order to 
maximize the use for businesses. 
Mr. Kamhi noted the space was considered lost space because the space 
was dedicated for emergency access.  That was why the proposal was to 
superimpose a bike lane over the top of the emergency lane. 
Council Member DuBois wanted to understand how the City will limit folks 
from crossing the bike lanes. 
Ms. Apple disclosed there would be marked pedestrian crossings as well 
as barriers around the dining spaces. 
Council Member DuBois understood on Sundays the farmers market would 
continue to use the middle of the street. 
Ms. Apple confirmed that is correct. 
Mayor Burt asked if other permanent structures would be allowed. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Ms. Apple stated any business with a parklet will be required to transition 
to the permanent parklet guidelines and the guidelines addressed roofed 
structures. 
Mayor Burt wanted to understand if Staff met with businesses and 
discussed whether it was beneficial to invest in more permanent structures 
with the understanding the program would sunset in December of 2023. 
Ms. Apple noted the survey did ask several questions regarding that.  It 
was a concern of businesses whether to take the risk of investing and then 
have the City discontinue the program.  The permit for the larger tents 
was only valid for 6-months because anything longer was considered a 
building.  
Mr. Lindsey mentioned the Fire Code did require permits for tents larger 
than 400-square feet and confirmed they could only be erected up to 6-
months at a time.  
Mayor Burt wanted to know if the City was providing enough time for 
businesses to transition from temporary tents to more permanent 
structures.  He asked if there were locations wide enough for the full 8-
foot sidewalk and dining together. 
Ms. Apple commented Staff had not done a thorough analysis but stated 
both California Avenue and Ramona Street varied in sidewalk widths.  
Upon visual inspection, many of the businesses were over capacity in 
terms of outdoor space.  Another topic for discussion was how much 
outside space could businesses use. 
Mayor Burt requested further explanation regarding capacity. 
Ms. Apple explained that early in the pandemic restaurants were allowed 
to seat up to 100 percent of their capacity outside.  
Mayor Burt was not aware the City had defined capacity as indoor and 
outdoor. 
Council Member Cormack mentioned there were many places along 
California Avenue that did not have dining in the street.  She wanted to 
understand how those spaces would be addressed to keep pedestrians out 
of the bike lanes. 
Ms. Apple remarked Staff proposed to utilize those spaces with public art 
or other enhancements while still allowing space for the farmers market. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Council Member Cormack inquired what other fire departments were 
requiring for closed streets. 
Mr. Lindsey shared that some fire departments required lanes to go 
through the area, some used automatic bollards and some broke up the 
space into small areas with emergency access on either side. 
Mr. Kamhi noted there will be signage for pedestrians and edge treatments 
installed by the City. 
PUBLIC COMMENT 
Zareen, a shop owner on California Avenue, remarked more folks were 
doing their shopping online instead of visiting brick and mortar stores.  She 
supported keeping the street closed but with no bikes and no cars.  
Removing the tents from the restaurants would make the retail shops 
more visible. 
Lara Ekwal, a shop owner on California Avenue, encouraged the Council to 
consider California Avenue and Ramona Street separated.  She requested 
that California Avenue be opened up to cars while the feasibility study was 
being done but with no bicycle access.  Having a blocked off rectangle was 
unsafe and ugly.  She encouraged the City to reach out to leasing agencies 
to address the rising percentage of vacant stores. 
Rebecca Eisenberg expressed that street closures assisted small business 
owners and retail restaurants if done wisely.  Foot traffic was very 
important for small businesses and the large tents blocked their 
storefronts.  To address vacancies, she suggested not requiring parking 
because there was a 6-story parking garage available to California Avenue. 
Giuseppe commented that Staff's proposals was a move in the right 
direction.  He liked the concept of extending the closures to 2023 and 
encouraged the City to explore capacity.  
Lori Romero Villarrea, a shop owner, agreed that many folks did not feel 
comfortable coming inside.  Her main concern was the safety of the 
proposed bicycle lane. She supported closing California Avenue and 
believed the vacancy rate was an issue before the pandemic hit. 
April Webster supported the extension of the closure for California Avenue 
to the end of 2023.  She often visited California Avenue by bicycle and 
would continue to walk her bike through the parklets if the street were to 
remain closed. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Alfred Pace, a business owner on California Avenue, supported the 
continued closure of the street.  The closure of California Avenue had re-
energized the street and reestablished the arts. 
Leland Wiesne loved walk-able areas but believed having a bicycle lane 
down the middle of California Avenue was unsafe.  He suggested having 
more bike parking to encourage folks to walk the area.  He expressed 
concerns about parking when the vacant buildings acquired tenants and  
he could not support the closure of the street. 
Nancy Coupal, a business owner on Ramona Street, appreciated the City's 
efforts to help small businesses during the pandemic.  She urged the 
Council to continue the closure of half of Ramona Street.  The businesses 
needed outdoor seating in order to stay afloat among many other benefits. 
Jessica Roth, a business owner on California Avenue, appreciated Staff's 
attempts of bringing more foot traffic to the area.  She requested speed 
mitigation measures be installed for bicycles and safe pedestrian 
crossings.  She requested the street be opened to cars during the planning 
process. 
Lisa Robin, a retail business owner on California Avenue, commented that 
the City's response to close the street during the pandemic was the 
appropriate decision.  Extending the street closure and using it as a bike 
superhighway posed a risk to retail owners.  The street was cleaner before 
the closure and the street was designed for slower traffic and walkable 
spaces. 
Mike Stone, an owner of a grocery store, remarked the businesses were 
not only dealing with COVID-19 but also inflation, prices, wages, supply 
chain issues and other alarming factors.  He noted there was a majority of 
businesses who had voiced opposition to extending the street closure and 
he echoed those comments. 
Charlie Weidan requested the City evaluate how extending the closure 
would affect all businesses on both California Avenue and Ramona Street.  
The City should use a coordinated effort to attract dining and retail guests 
to the area. 
Greg St. Claire, a restaurant owner, expressed he was concerned about 
retail and the office spaces in Downtown.  Without restaurants there was 
no commercial or vibrant retail.  He supported high quality standards and 
high-quality finishes if the street were to remain closed.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Terri Holtzemer clarified that the extension of the closure was from El 
Camino Real to Birch Street.  He referenced Packet Page 163 that indicated 
there had been a shift in opinions on if California Avenue should remain 
closed.  He suggested the City explore the City of Los Alto's model and 
noted the street was a publicly owned street maintained by taxpayers.  
Now was the time to reevaluate what a business's fair share was.  
Mayor Burt announced that Item 13 would be rescheduled for an upcoming 
meeting. 
The Council took a break from 9:02 PM and reconvened at 9:10 PM 
Mr. Kamhi remarked in areas where there was not on-street dining the 
City would install edge treatments. 
Council Member Cormack inquired if Staff had any information on how 
vacancies had changed on University Avenue since it had been reopened. 
Ms. Apple noted there was an increase in foot traffic and sales. 
Council Member Cormack agreed that California Avenue and Ramona 
Street are two different situations.  She asked where bike parking would 
be for California avenue. 
Mr. Kahmi remarked that bike parking facilities could be used as edge 
treatments. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the bike parking at the garage was being 
utilized. 
Ms. Apple confirmed that it was. 
Council Member Cormack suggested having more bike parking in the dead-
end areas.  She remarked there are other countries who have closed roads 
and did not have an emergency access in the middle of the road. 
Mr. Lindsey restated many of the buildings do not have sprinkler systems 
and fire trucks needed close access to the building.  Also, it was best 
practice to have the ambulance as close to the scene as possible. 
Fire Chief Geo Blackshire added the recommendation was to minimize the 
time it would take to arrive at the emergency as well. 
Council Member Stone invited Staff to explain the aesthetics and design 
elements of the proposal. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Transportation Planning Manager Sylvia Star-Lack noted that Staff had not 
determined the design of the bike and fire lane but the lanes would not 
look like the visual in the Staff report. 
Council Member Stone expressed his concern about having a large swatch 
of paint running down the middle of the road. 
Mr. Kamhi noted that State Street in Santa Barbara, California used red 
and green markings to mark their emergency and bike lane.  The City 
would utilize signs and barriers to direct folks. 
Council Member Stone inquired if the consultant doing the long-term 
alternatives would also be doing an economic impact analysis.  
Mr. Kamhi confirmed an economic analysis would be performed and that 
was directed by Council at the February 28, 2022 meeting. 
Council Member Stone mentioned the Staff report indicated a request for 
a consultant. 
Mr. Kamhi clarified Staff would be issuing a Request for Proposals (RFP) in 
order to hire a consultant. 
Council Member Stone asked why retail on California Avenue recovered 
more quickly than other retail in the city. 
Administrative services Department Steven Guagliardo mentioned that 
sales for California Avenue declined from 2018 to 2019 but then grew in 
2019 to 2021.  As noted in the Staff Report there were a whole number of 
variables as to why sales increased. 
Council Member Stone appreciated the surveying of the local businesses 
and the community.  He inquired if there had been further dialog with 
businesses on California Avenue and Ramona Street. 
Ms. Apple answered Staff talked with the businesses prior to the surveys 
being sent out.  Many follow up conversations were held with Staff about 
the proposed layout of the emergency and bicycle lane. 
Council Member DuBois agreed that California Avenue and Ramona Street 
were separate situations.  Ramona Street was designated as a historic 
district and the aesthetics of the closed street should reflect that.  
California Avenue had more variety, it was a large space and there were 
noticeable issues during different times of the day.  Based on the public 
feedback, there was a lot of uncertainty whether to reopen the street or 
not.  The goal of the closure was to experience outdoor dining, not extra 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
indoor space that was outdoors.  The Council should discuss rent for street 
spaces.  One concept was to open California Avenue Monday through 
Friday and then close it Friday evening through Sunday.  He agreed with 
many of the speakers that a 2-year bike path was not what was envisioned 
for California Avenue and the bikes should be routed to surrounding streets 
instead.  The visions for California Avenue should be similar to the Stanford 
Mall or Santana Row.  If the goal was to make the street a pedestrian 
space, it did not make sense to have a bike path down the street for 2-
years. 
Vice Mayor Kou understood the California Fire Code required emergency 
roads to be 20-feet wide. 
Mr. Lindsey confirmed that is correct.  He noted that Stanford Shopping 
Mall used bollards that could be lowered by emergency personnel in case 
of an emergency.  The mall was also designed with wharf hydrants and 
active suppression systems. 
Vice Mayor Kou acknowledged that the layout of California Avenue and 
Ramona Street were not designed for emergency access if the streets are 
closed.  She expressed concern that the businesses would start to 
encroach into the bicycle and emergency lane.  She mentioned the 
Architectural Review Board (ARB) recommended edge treatments be no 
taller than 36-inches to allow visibility.  She encouraged restaurants to  
provide aid to the retail businesses by keeping tents and barriers lower for 
maximum visibility.   She asked if the Economic Development Committees 
(EDC) will replace the California and Downtown Business District 
Committees. 
Ms. Apple clarified the intention of the EDC was to supplement the existing 
committees.  The Downtown Business EDC had been established and Staff 
was working to form the California Avenue EDC.  
Vice Mayor Kou supported Council Member Cormack's suggestion to place 
bike racks at the end and in the vacant spaces along the streets.  She 
expressed surprise that many business owners who supported the closures 
had now articulated that the street should be reopened. 
Mayor Burt wanted to know if the alleys along California Avenue could be 
used for emergency access. 
Mr. Lindsey restated that the fire department needed two access points. 
Mayor Burt asked if having two access points was a requirement. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Mr. Blackshire remarked he could not comment on the requirement for 
access.  The fire department's recommendations were based on the size 
of the apparatus and operation. 
Mayor Burt encouraged Staff to explore it further.  He commented there 
has been a temporary, haphazard design for the past 2-years on California 
Avenue.  The main reason for the decrease in visitors on California Avenue 
was the large-scale absence of office workers, not cars.  He believed the 
restaurants and evening activities carried California Avenue through the 
pandemic.  The rebound of retail sales during 2019 through 2021 was an 
unexpected surprise. Roughly 40 percent of folks who filled out the survey 
stated they biked or walked to California Avenue.  That fulfilled many of 
the goals in the Bike and Pedestrian Master Plan but also the City's 
Comprehensive Plan.  The City should continue to encourage folks to bike 
to California Avenue and provide bike parking along the street.  Also, to 
use any empty parklet spaces for bike corrals.  He expressed concern that 
the City had done very little to support retailers.  The City should 
prioritized more marketing and support for retailers.  In the beginning 
folks were encouraged to walk down the center of the street for social 
distancing purposes.  Now the approach should be to move pedestrians off 
the street onto the sidewalks and in front of retailers.  He encouraged 
more signage, an app for California Avenue and that live concerts be held 
at the far east end to revitalize the area.  He did not support restricting 
the use of parklets to restaurants only. 
Council Member Tanaka appreciated the surveys and the public outreach.  
While he understood the reason to place the bicycle lane down the center 
of the street.  He questioned if pedestrians would be able to cross the lane 
safely and why the emergency lane had to be 16-feet wide.  The streets 
needed cleaner aesthetics.  He requested Staff to provide a breakdown 
analysis on Sales Tax with respect to the part on California Avenue that 
was closed compared to the part that was opened.  He believed the data 
would inform the Council on if the closure had helped or hurt businesses. 
Mr. Guagliardo remarked Staff did not have the data to dis-aggregate by 
what was closure or what was open or by address.  A consultant was 
working on it and that type of breakdown would be included in ongoing 
economic development efforts. Staff believed the data by district did 
answer many of the questions asked by Council.  The data indicated that 
the overall situation had less to do with the streets being closed and more 
to do with the larger Sales Tax trends. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to understand why it was hard to parse 
out the data if all the information was available.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Mr. Guagliardo clarified it was more time intensive instead of difficult.  The 
closure and the open dates did not line up evenly with the quarter dates. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed not having the data line up would be 
difficult to work through.  He asked what percentage of the California and 
University Avenue Business District had opened streets to vehicle traffic. 
Ms. Apple answered Staff had not calculated that.  
Council Member Tanaka commented that all stakeholders wanted the 
highest amount of economic activity and he encouraged Staff to parse out 
the data to help the Council make the right decision.  He asked how many 
retailers were on California Avenue, University Avenue and Ramona 
Street. 
Ms. Apple disclosed she did not have that figure. 
MOTION:  Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Stone to  
1) Adopt the attached resolutions (10039 and 10040) extending the City 
Manager’s authority to temporarily close portions of California Avenue 
and Ramona Street until December 31, 2023; and  
2) Authorize Staff to implement the following specific access and 
perimeter rules:  
a. 
Implement a dedicated emergency access lane.  
b. 
Require the installation of edge treatments around retail or 
dining spaces that are no taller than 36 inches from the 
platform or street, whichever is applicable  
c. 
Direct staff to work with businesses to eliminate large tents 
and re-establish an 8-foot sidewalk width as soon as feasible.  
d. 
Implement a slow dedicated two-way bicycle lane on Cal Ave.  
e. 
Within the California Avenue closure, City staff may install 
appropriate enhancements or aesthetic elements that will also 
provide a visible distinction from the emergency access lane 
and dining areas.  
f. 
Within the California Avenue closure, all changes to the interim 
closed program shall be coordinated with the Urban Village 
Farmers’ Market to accommodate minimum market footprint 
requirements 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
g. 
Within Ramona St. closure have city staff develop design 
requirements for the long-term closure that support the 
historic district; and  
3) 
Direct staff to develop a plan to support retailers on California 
Avenue, including a marketing program; and 
4) 
Direct staff to develop an interim fee structure for Cal Ave and 
Ramona.   
Mayor Burt stated it was important for the City to improve the current 
design and support for pedestrians. 
Council Member Stone agreed with Mayor Burt and stated now was the 
time to create a better shopping and dining experience.  Though the 
proposals were not  perfect, they were the best proposals to move forward.  
The motion provided consistency to the business community.  It was very 
important to receive feedback from the businesses.  He shared the 
concerns of the other Council Members regarding emergency access and 
the bike lane but believed the City must stay consistent with the 
Sustainability Climate Action Plan (S/CAP) and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Council Member Cormack could not see how Items 2(a) and 2(d) of the 
motion were going to affect the current situation on California Avenue and 
Ramona Street.  
Mr. Kamhi wanted to understand what Item 3 of the motion meant. 
Mayor Burt remarked the item was not recommended to be a 
transportation initiative.  Staff should explore wayfinding signage, retail 
parklets, retail on widened sidewalks and utilizing different types of art to 
encourage folks to visit the eastern end of California Avenue. 
Mr. Kamhi inquired if the support for retailers only addressed the interim 
period. 
Mayor Burt articulated there was no reason not to continue the efforts in 
the long-term. 
City Manager Ed Shikada stated Item 3 of the motion could be a large 
undertaking.  He suggested the item be explored further by Staff and 
returned to Council for follow up.  
Mayor Burt emphasized the City had not supported retailers and many of 
the initiatives such as signage would greatly help retailers. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Mr. Shikada noted that a large portion of the City's Uplift Local Program 
was focused on retailers. 
Council Member Cormack asked how much space Item 2(a) and 2(d) of 
the motion remove from the current situation on Ramona Street. 
Mr. Lindsey commented that many businesses had already moved their 
spaces back to provide emergency access. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff was recommending any 
enhancements or aesthetic improvements to Ramona Street. 
Ms. Apple confirmed Ramona Street would receive edge treatments.  
California Avenue would receive additional enhancements to its empty 
spaces.  The farmers market’s footprint was a huge limiting factor in what 
the City could do with the available space on California Avenue. 
Council Member Cormack could not support 2(d) of the motion.  She 
wanted to understand how the bike lane would affect future plans of 
transforming the space into a pedestrian friendly area. 
Mr. Kamhi remarked the long-term analysis would evaluate different 
alternatives. 
Council Member Cormack stated a two-way bicycle lane down the middle 
was not the envision the community had for California Avenue.  She 
understood that the Council was not committing to a plan for Item 3 of 
the motion.  
Administrative Services Director Kiely Nose answered the Council was not 
directing Staff to implement a plan.  
Council Member Cormack asked if Item 3 would address the entire 
business district on California Avenue. 
Mayor Burt answered yes. 
Council Member Cormack wanted all businesses included in the overall 
plan.  She recommended changing the language of Item 3 to a marketing 
information program. 
Mayor Burt did not want to limit it to only a marketing information 
program. 
Council Member Cormack understood that Item 3 of the motion did not 
include University Avenue because it was not a closed street. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Mayor Burt commented the intention was not to preclude University 
Avenue. 
Council Member Cormack requested Item 3 be voted on separately. 
Mr. Kamhi recommended the motion allow a maximum height of 36-inches 
for edge treatments. 
Council Member DuBois was not convinced that the City should allow large 
tents during inclement weather. 
Mayor Burt agreed but believed businesses should have time to change 
their setup. 
Council Member DuBois recommended the use of umbrellas with no end 
caps rather than large tents. 
Mayor Burt recalled that any new parklets could not have large tents but 
the motion was addressing existing parklets. 
Council Member DuBois interpreted Item C of the motion as it encouraged 
the use of tents. 
Mayor Burt agreed but he did not want to create a hardship for existing 
businesses. 
Council Member DuBois mentioned that many businesses that left 
California Avenue were not commuter focused businesses.  He was 
concerned about Item D of the motion.  California Avenue was a 
destination point and he did not want California Avenue to become a bike 
boulevard.  He wanted to see the City accelerate the formulation of design 
guidelines for parklets.  He agreed with Council Member Tanaka that the 
farmers market should be reoriented into the center of the street and 
direct pedestrians to walk on the sidewalk.  The sidewalk width 
requirements should be enforced because many of the sidewalks on 
California Avenue were narrow. 
Mayor Burt understood the sidewalk widths were addressed at the prior 
Council meeting.  
Mr. Shikada answered that is correct. 
Council Member DuBois supported having signs to the parking garage but 
not to over use signage.  He supported the idea of retail parklets but the 
main problem was attracting more visitors throughout the day.  More 
events at night would not help daytime retailers.  He requested that Item 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
3 of the motion be voted on separately. He requested that Staff consider 
the historic nature of Ramona Street in the design guidelines. 
Ms. Apple did speak with the market manager for the farmers market and 
having booths back-to-back was the least desirable configuration. 
Council Member DuBois wanted to understand the edge treatments better 
and what would happen during the farmers market. 
Ms. Apple explained there was existing space for the farmers market to 
utilize the space around the in-street dining spaces. 
Council Member DuBois rephrased he pictured there would be barriers 
between the bike lane and parklets. 
Ms. Apple clarified the barriers were not temporary and were located 
around the dining spaces.  
Council Member DuBois requested Item 2(c) be voted on separately. 
Mayor Burt asked if the intention was not to allow large tents from now 
on. 
Council Member DuBois answered yes. 
Mayor Burt agreed large tents should be removed but wanted to allow for 
a transition period.  
Council Member DuBois believed there was time to remove the tents and 
replace them with semi-permanent structures. 
Mr. Shikada found it appropriate to specify highlight enforcement of the 
sidewalk width.  He suggested that removal of the tents be included in the 
enforcement of the sidewalk width. 
Mayor Burt amended Item C of the motion. 
Mr. Kamhi requested clarification regarding Item G of the motion.  
Mayor Burt clarified Item G of the motion applied to the long-term plan. 
Mr. Shikada suggested clarifying language for Item C. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the plan was to have an emergency and 
bike lane down the center of Ramona Street. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Mayor Burt asked if Council Members were concerned about both streets 
having the emergency and bike lane or just California Avenue.  
Council Member Cormack did not see the proposal as an issue for Ramona 
Street. 
Council Member Tanaka was concerned about having an 16-foot wide 
emergency lane on Ramona Street because it was a very narrow street. 
Mr. Shikada remarked that in the context of a street, 16-feet was small. 
Council Member Tanaka did not want to see pedestrians walking down the 
center of the streets and believed that would be the case if Item 2(d) of 
the motion failed. 
Mayor Burt believed if a bike lane were constructed then it would be clear 
that bicycles go down the center and pedestrians would walk on the 
sidewalk.  
Council Member Tanaka understood that foot traffic would be in the center 
of the street during the farmers market. 
Mr. Shikada confirmed that is correct. 
Council Member Tanaka emphasized the traffic should be on the sidewalks 
and not in the center of the road. 
PROPOSED AMENDMENT: Council Member Tanaka moved to separate 
the data into open street data and closed street data. 
Mayor Burt could not support the amendment. 
PROPOSED AMENDMENT FAILED DUE TO LACK OF A SECOND 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if the maximum barrier height was from the street 
level as indicated in the Staff Report or from the platform level. 
Mr. Kamhi apologized and stated there were no platforms on California 
Avenue and Ramona Street.  He recommended the motion state from the 
platform or street. 
Mayor Burt agreed. 
Vice Mayor Kou acknowledged a letter from the public stating that their 
office tenants were not allowed to have private outdoor space.  She 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
understood from the prior discussion that all businesses could apply for 
outdoor space. 
Mr. Shikada stated that was the Council’s intention and the office could 
apply. 
Mayor Burt was hesitant to expand the outdoor use to office. 
Vice Mayor Kou understood the City was charging an encroachment fee to 
businesses who use the public right of way. 
Ms. Apple explained that all permit fees had been waived during the 
temporary closure.  Staff had not done the analysis on a potential fee 
structure for a permanent closure. 
Mayor Burt amended the motion to direct Staff to develop an interim fees 
structure for California Avenue and Ramona Street. 
Council Member Stone believed that the public would be precluded from 
using an outdoor office space and he strongly opposed expanding the 
outdoor use to offices.  He envisioned California Avenue being changed 
into a pedestrian promenade and having a bike lane down the center would 
encourage folks to walk on the sidewalk.  He asked what type of barrier 
was at the end of the closed portion of Ramona Street. 
Ms. Apple answered that currently there was a water filled barrier with an 
opening in the middle. 
Mayor Burt amended Item 2(d) to implement a slow dedicated two-way 
bicycle lane. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Item 2(e) allowed Staff to improve the 
existing orange barriers. 
Mr. Kamhi answered yes. 
Ms. Apple mentioned one of the concepts was to place temporary public 
art covers over the barriers and they would be changed out frequently. 
Council Member DuBois inquired if there would be a barrier at the open 
end of Ramona Street blocking cars from driving down the emergency 
lane. 
Ms. Apple explained the barriers would be reconfigured and additional 
moveable barriers would be installed. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Motion Split for the Purpose of Voting:  
MOTION:  Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Stone to  
3. Direct Staff to develop a plan to support retailers on California 
Avenue, including a marketing program. 
MOTION PASSED: 4-2-1, Cormack, Tanaka No, Filseth Absent  
MOTION:  Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Stone to  
2. Authorize Staff to implement the following specific access and 
perimeter rules:  
d. Implement a slow dedicated two-way bicycle lane.  
MOTION FAILED:  3-3-1, Cormack, DuBois, Kou No, Filseth Absent 
MOTION PASSED: 5-1-1, Tanaka No, Filseth Absent 
15. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of Two Ordinances Implementing the 
Objective Standards Project, Including: 1) New Chapter 18.24, 
Contextual Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards; 2) 
Modifications to Affordable Housing (AH) Overlay District to 
Eliminate the Legislative Process; 3) Changes to Remove 
Inconsistencies and Redundancies, and Streamline Project Review 
Throughout Title 18. (9:15 – 10:45 PM) 
ACTION: Item continued to future meeting 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Stone shared his experience riding along with a Palo Alto 
police officer.  
Council Member DuBoise thanked Staff for the Junior Museum and Zoo 
and Rinconada Park grand opening ceremony.  He shared that the West 
Valley College held the 42nd Special Games.  He supported having an 
extra meeting to catch up on outstanding items. 
Vice Mayor Kou recommended the Council discuss and write a letter on 
the City’s perspective regarding Assembly Bill 2181. 
Mayor Burt attended the League of Cities conference.  Several Assembly 
Members and a Senator remarked that cities provide a strong voice that 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
was influential in their decision-making.  They encouraged cities to provide 
their opinions earlier in the legislative process 
 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at X:XX P.M.
CITY COUNCIL 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
Page 27 of 27 
 
 
ATTEST:                                             
APPROVED:           
____________________ 
 
 
____________________                                 
City Clerk                                              Mayor 
NOTE: Action minutes are prepared in accordance with Palo Alto Municipal 
Code (PAMC) 2.04.160(a) and (b). Summary minutes (sense) are prepared in 
accordance with PAMC Section 2.04.160(c). Beginning in January 2018, in 
accordance with Ordinance No. 5423, the City Council found action minutes 
and the video/audio recordings of Council proceedings to be the official records 
of both Council and committee proceedings. These recordings are available on 
the City’s website. 
