CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 28
Special Meeting
May 9, 2022
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present:  
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka
Absent: 
None
Closed Session
1. 
CONFERENCE
WITH
CITY
ATTORNEY- 
EXISTING
LITIGATION
Subject: Julio Arevalo v. City of Palo Alto
U.S. District Court, 
Northern
District, 
Case # 
3:20-cv-04157-CRB
Authority: 
Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(1) 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member
Filseth to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
PUBLIC COMMENT
Aram James stated the case should settle for the asking price of $10 million
due to the evidence provided in the video of the incident. 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:05 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 5:45 P.M. 
There were no announcements for the Public.  
Special Orders of the Day
2. 
Affordable Housing Month Proclamation
2022
Mayor Burt proclaimed that the month of May is affordable housing month in
the City of Palo Alto.  
City Clerk Lesley Milton introduced a representative from Eden Housing who
received the proclamation. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Kate Blessing- Kawakawa, Eden Housing, explained Eden Housing is a non-
profit housing developer who began building affordable housing in 1968.  She
thanked the Council and the City for its dedication to build more affordable
housing in the City of Palo Alto. 
PUBLIC COMMENT
Linda Jolley remarked the City’s efforts to build more affordable housing was
not working.  There were many un-housed individuals living on the streets or
in their vehicles.  She recommended the City reexamine its philosophy and
approach to affordable housing.  
Aram James encouraged the City to explore low income housing reparations
and to work with the folks living in their vehicles.  
Mayor Burt shared that the City has moved aggressively towards creating a
transitional housing project and recently received confirmation the City will
receive grant funding for the project.  The City Council recently increased
commercial Impact Fees to fund more affordable housing in the City.  The City
also proposed to use a significant portion of the Business Tax revenue to fund
more affordable housing projects in the City. 
NO ACTION TAKEN
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
None
Public Comment
Linda Jolley ( In Person) emphasized the City’s approach to build more
affordable housing in the City was not working.  She encouraged the City to
build RV parks for folks living in their RVs or vehicles.  She stated the Palo
Alto Police Department was leaving Notices of Violations in inconspicuous
places on folks' cars and issuing them multiple times a day.  
Aram James mentioned he filed a Public Records Request in April 2022 asking
for what the application process will be for the next Chief of Police.  The
request was returned due to him asking a question instead of asking for
specific documents.  He requested City Attorney Molly Stump provide the
documentation.  
Matt Schlegel acknowledged the City’s work against climate change and its
focus on developing policies to help residents to stop burning fossil fuels.  He
shared that the three listed installation companies on the City’s website would
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
not install a new heat pump water heater at his home.  He recommended the
City make it easier for folks to convert their appliances. 
Shani Kleinhaus, speaking for the Santa Clara County Audubon Society, 
shared a video and presentation about night time bird migration across the
United States of America.  The primarily death of migrating birds was the loss
of habitat, outdoor/ feral cats and collisions with man made structures.  She
encouraged the Council to consider birds when approving projects and nature
preserve construction. 
Kerry Yarkin inquired which City body is responsible for granting the 48,000-
square foot Variance for the Castilleja School expansion project.  Through the
project review process, it was discovered the school had been over building
their maximum allowable space for years. 
Rebecca Eisenberg expressed confusion as to why the City was focusing on
heat pump water heaters when studies showed that cars were the top
polluters.  The City must reinstate the electric shuttles to reduce cars on the
roads.  Also, it was unreasonable to request renters to ask their landlords to
upgrade the appliances in their rentals.  Lastly, she requested how much
funding the City was playing for the Palo Alto Museum.  
Consent Calendar
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 8. 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 9. 
MOTION:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member
Cormack to approve Agenda Item Numbers 3-10. 
PUBLIC COMMENT
Jeff Levinsky appreciated Staff making adjustments to the Height Transition
Ordinance that he suggested. He noted the new law did not protect all
residential neighbors within 50-feet.  He requested the language be fixed in
the City’s Municipal Code.  The change would bring the law into compliance
with the Council’s direction made on January 24, 2022. 
Rebecca Eisenberg commented with respect to Item Four, the tree at 1872
Edgewood Drive was removed because it was damaged by new construction.  
She strongly urged the Council to pass the new Tree Ordinance before the
summer.  With respect to Item Eight, the City made a $900,000 budgeting
error and was seeking an adjustment without discussion. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Aram James noted that many of the items on the Consent Calendar were
high priced items, but the City continued to cut vital services to residents.  
He agreed discussion about the items should be held so the public can
understand what the Council is approving. 
3. 
Approve Minutes from the April 18, 2022 and City Council Meeting, 
April 25, 2022 City Council Meeting
4. 
Adoption of a Resolution Designating Redwood Tree at 1019 Forest
Court
as
a
New
Heritage
Tree # 5
and
Removing
Previously
Designated Silver Maple at 1872 Edgewood Drive From the List of
Heritage Trees
5. 
Resolution of the Council of the City of Palo Alto Approving the
Execution of Two Assignment Agreements to Assign Palo Alto's Base
Resource Percentage Received Under the 2025-2054 Contract With
the Western Area Power Administration to the Northern California
Power Agency
6. 
Approval
of
Construction
Contract
Number
C22182558
with
Enterprise
Roofing
Service, Inc. in an Amount Not-to-Exceed
497,233
to
Replace
the
Existing
H Wing
Roof at
Cubberley
Community
Center, Capital
Improvement
Program
Project
CB-
16002; and Authorization of Contract Contingency in an Amount Not-
to-Exceed $ 49,723 for Related, Additional but Unforeseen Work
Which May Develop During the Project. 
7. 
Approval
of
Contract
Amendment
No. 1
to
Contract
Number
C21179340 with Baker Tilly US, LLP. to Increase the Not-to-Exceed
Compensation
by $ 2,126,250 and Extend
the Term for Three
Additional Years for Continued Audit Services
8. 
Approval of $ 900,000 Budget Amendment in the Refuse Fund for
Fiscal Year 2022 for Collection, Hauling, and Disposal of Refuse for
an Administrative Correction
9. 
Second Reading of an Ordinance Clarifying Ambiguities in Height
Transitions, Adding RMD to the list of Residential Districts and
Amending the Setback for the RM- 40 Zone District
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING:  
MOTION PASSED FOR ITEMS 1-7: 7-0
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
MOTION PASSED FOR ITEM 8 PASSED: 7-1 Tanaka no
MOTION PASSED FOR ITEM 9 PASSED: 7-1 Kou no
Council Member Tanaka agreed with the public comment that $900,000 is a
large error.  The report did not indicate how it happened, or how this type of
error can be prevented in the future. 
Council Member Kou believed there were mistakes in the Height Transition
Ordinance and agreed simple corrections in the ordinance will provide more
protections for residents.  Adopting the ordinance placed a financial hardship
on residents if they wished to file an appeal.  She requested the item be
brought back to Council with the Objective Standards. 
City Manager Comments
Ed Shikada, City Manager explained Staff’s annual practice after each fiscal
year was to calculate an estimate of what funds will be needed in the current
year versus the upcoming year.  In the case of Item Eight, Staff believed the
funds would be next year and not the current year.  With respect to the
COVID-19 Pandemic, the City was tracking an increase in COVID-19 cases as
well as hospitalizations.  The month of May was Asian American and Native
Hawaiian/ Pacific Island Heritage Month and upcoming events could be found
on the City’s website.  On May 10, 2022 the annual safety update event was
to be held by the Fire Chief, the Police Chief and the Office of Emergency
Services.  On May 14, 2022 was the Party in the Park event for the Junior
Museum and Zoo.  On the City’s website was a survey for the public to provide
their comments and recommendations
about the temporary street closure
extension for California Avenue and Ramona Street.  The community was
invited to the Municipal Center Open House on June 18, 2022.  Upcoming
items for the May 16, 2022 City Council meeting were the Objective Standards
and interim closures for Ramona Street and California Avenue. 
Action Items
10. 
Review and provide feedback on the proposed permanent parklet
standards and program policies; and Adopt an interim ordinance and
resolution to continue the pilot parklet program until December 31, 
2022
City Manager Ed Shikada shared that Staff debated whether the item should
have been a study session or an action item due to the range of issues the
topic covered.  He encouraged the Council to provide direction with the
understanding that the item would come back to the Council at a later time. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Assistant Planning and Transportation Director Rachael Tanner confirmed Staff
was seeking input on the proposed permanent parklet standards and program
policies.  Also, that Council considered adopting an ordinance and resolution
to continue the pilot parklet program until December 31, 2022.  Parklets and
outdoor dining began during the height of the COVID-19 Pandemic in June of
2020.  The City allowed parklets to help local businesses remain in business
and provide a safe place for residents.  Since its inception, residents have
continued to support the use of parklets.  The pilot parklet guidelines focused
on reducing the overall risk and immediate safety for parklet patrons, 
motorists and pedestrians.  Aesthetics, design consistency, and fees were not
included in the pilot parklet guidelines.  A parklet is an extension of the
pedestrian right of way which utilizes one to three parking spaces.  Only legally
permitted existing restaurants could have a parklet and they could only be on
streets with a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or lower.  The components of
a parklet included, but were not limited to, the platform, the enclosure and
traffic safety features.  Staff recommended the Council focus their discussion
on retrofitting, edge treatments, sidewalls, heaters, neighboring businesses
and building owner support, limited sidewalk dining in conjunction with
parklets, restricting fabric tents and alcoholic beverage services.  With respect
to retrofitting, Staff recommended a transition period for businesses to change
their existing condition to the guidelines.  With respect to edge treatments, 
Staff recommended a periodic barrier such as planters or filled containers.  
The Architecture Review Board ( ARB) recommended that edge treatments
have a maximum height of 36-inches.  Staff suggested that sidewalls be no
taller than 42-inches from the ground to maintain line of sight.  The ARB
indicated that some level of transparent siding should be used and requested
additional time to discuss the concept further.  Staff recommended that the
use of heaters be prohibited for all parklets due to them being the number
one cause of compliance
issues.  
ARB believed
heaters
were a crucial
component of the parklets and requested that a subcommittee explore electric
heaters versus propane.  
If a parklet extended beyond an applicant’s
storefront.  Staff proposed the applicant obtain letters of support from the
neighboring tenants and building owner.  Staff believed that parklets paired
with sidewalk dining decreased the area for pedestrians to cross safely.  Staff
recommended 8-feet of clear, unobstructed path of travel be made available
in order to obtain a sidewalk dining permit in conjunction with a parklet permit.  
Staff also recommended that no fabric tents or canopies be used but the ARB
recommended allowing fabric covers if it could be used safely.  ARB also
recommended prohibiting the use of vinyl, soft plastics, and tarps.  Lastly, 
Staff proposed a Conditional Use Permit ( CUP) process to amend a CUP for
alcohol service outdoors.  The Public Works Department continued to work
with other agencies to review the permits and inspect the parklets during
construction.  
Parklets would be subject to annual inspection and Staff
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
recommended an annual time period be set during which parklet applications
could be submitted. 
Consultant Sophie Gabel- Scheinbaum reported that after comparing other
jurisdictions,  Staff prepared two methods for a Parklet Fee Structure.  The
first was the cost of on-street parking spaces in Palo alto for a full calendar
year.  The second option was to use the average ground-floor retail rents and
apply the rate to the average square footage of the parking space.  The current
daily fee for use of a parking space in the City was $25 and over a year that
equated to $9,125 per space.  The commercial rent valuation fee provided
several fee amounts based on rates for ground floor retail.  The City of
Burlingame and the City of Mountain View both used a 9 percent proportion
of the market rate rental value.  In general, many cities opted to do a flat rate
fee instead of a per space fee. 
Ms. Tanner shared the feedback from the focus group was that landscaping
and planters may be hard to maintain.  They supported having enclosures and
sidewalls to protect diners from the sun and wind.  Also, to allow propane
heaters because they are more cost effective.  Some folks felt there should be
no fee while others expected there to be a fee.  Staff conducted a survey and
there were 24 respondents. Many of the existing parklets utilized two parking
spaces.  Many of the survey respondents supported a fee of $100 to $250.  
Mayor Burt inquired if folks understood it was a monthly fee per parking space. 
Ms. Tanner believed they understood it applied to the whole parklet.  She
noted respondents from the survey supported the use of propane heaters.  
Respondents also recommended that the guidelines be clear, streamlined, that
parklets have a uniformed look, and other similar guidelines.  In conclusion
Staff requested a 6-month extension of the pilot program to allow for more
refinement of the standards. 
Council Member DuBois asked what Staff’s recommendation is for the barrier
height. 
Ms. Tanner concurred Staff was comfortable with ARB’s recommendation of
36-inches. 
Council Member DuBois understood that a third of the parklets take up 4 or
more parking spaces.  He asked what the biggest parklet was in the city. 
Senior Engineer Mike Nafziger predicted the largest parklet was between four
and five spaces. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Council Member DuBois mentioned that many cities allowed parklets at the
street level.  He inquired how those cities complied with American Disability
Act requirements. 
Ms. Tanner explained that some cities allowed it under the temporary program
but not in the permanent program. 
Ms. Gabel-Scheinbaum confirmed that none of the permanent programs
allowed at grade parklets. 
Council Member DuBois asked if Council could suggest changes to the
temporary ordinance. 
Ms. Tanner answered yes. 
Council Member DuBois inquired if the City required insurance for parklets. 
Mr. Nafziger confirmed any Encroachment Permit required insurance. 
Council Member Filseth remarked there were two issues.  One was how to
allow the use of public space for private use and the other was design
standards.  He wanted to know if there are any electric heaters being used in
any of the parklets. 
Mr. Nafziger answered yes. 
Council Member Filseth inquired about the lease lengths for parklets. 
Ms. Gabel-Scheinbaum stated that the permits included language that gave
the jurisdiction authority to discontinue the use of the parklet for emergencies
or maintenance. 
Council Member Stone wanted to know how much greenhouse gas propane
outdoor heaters omitted. 
Public Works Director Brad Eggleston believed it would be a small amount but
could provide the information at a later time. 
Council Member Stone encouraged Staff to explore it further.  He inquired if
the proposal was to phase out the heaters or an immediate change. 
Ms. Tanner remarked it would be part of the transition period.  The Palo Alto
Fire Department was very concerned about the existing propane heaters that
were out of compliance. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Council Member Stone inquired why two inspections were needed during
construction. 
Ms. Tanner explained the platform construction would be inspected to address
compliance and then the remaining components would be inspected. 
Council Member Stone supported having a designated time when parklet
applications could be submitted but believed once a year may be too
restrictive. 
Ms. Tanner suggested there be an annual set date for the transitional period
so that the City can keep inventory.  After the transitional period Staff was
comfortable having multiple application submittal times. 
Mr. Nafziger noted that typical insurance policies are renewed annually. 
Council Member Stone wanted to understand how the City of San Diego built
in an equity component in their parklet program. 
Ms. Tanner explained that areas in the City of San Diego that suffer from
climate change have a lower cost. 
Ms. 
Gabel- Scheinbaum
confirmed
they
linked
climate
impacts
with
environmental justice. 
Council Member Stone wanted to know how Palo Alto could do that. 
Ms. Tanner
provided
the
City
could
give
a discount
to locally-owned
restaurants instead of country- wide restaurants. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the special street sweeper was sufficient to
keep the area between the parklets and the street clean of debris. 
Mr. Eggleston disclosed there are areas around the parklets where the
sweeper cannot reach and Staff was cleaning them by hand. 
Mayor Burt asked if Staff had explored whether the electric heaters are radiant
or resistant heaters. 
Mr. Nafziger did not know what type of heaters they were. 
Mayor Burt articulated it was important to make the distinction.  
He
understood the power requirements for radiant heaters was less than resistant
heaters.  He wanted to understand what capacity did the restaurants have to
provide electricity to outdoor heaters. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Ms. Tanner noted Staff had not done that research. 
Mayor Burt inquired if there had been evaluations on the health risks of folks
breathing in the combustible materials from propane heaters. 
Ms. Tanner disclosed Staff had not explored it. 
Mayor Burt mentioned there are areas where the sidewalk encroachment has
decreased to 4-feet.  He wanted to understand the impacts of having an 8-
foot requirement for sidewalks. 
Ms. Tanner explained that Staff could evaluate the businesses that had
parklets on the sidewalk and in the road and what impacts they may
encounter. 
Mayor Burt articulated that one concern from businesses was that the CIty
collected additional Sale Tax revenue from the increased dining and that the
City should not charge a fee.  He asked what percent of Sales Tax was the
City receiving and had that been considered in the proposed fee amounts.  
Ms. Tanner answered Staff had not done that analysis. 
Mayor Burt believed that piece of information was an important consideration
for fee rates.  He wanted to know if any additional bike parking had been
installed in the downtown areas. 
City Transportation Director Philip Kamhi noted that any additional bike
parking was from recent development requests. 
Mayor Burt wanted to see more bicycle parking for the downtown areas.  
Recently a bike corral was removed from Ramona Street and now there was
a shortage of bicycle parking.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to understand why businesses could not share
a parklet. 
Ms. Tanner explained there was no prohibition on businesses sharing a parklet. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to hear the proposal for shared parklets. 
Mr. Eggleston concurred during the pandemic the City allowed businesses to
place their parklets in front of neighboring
businesses.  
The temporary
ordinance was later amended to not allow parklets in front of neighboring
businesses.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Council Member Tanaka remarked several parklets had been placed in front
of neighboring businesses' signs and asked how that situation was mitigated.  
Ms. Tanner believed the letter of support will mitigate those impacts and
facilitate a compromise between neighboring businesses. 
Mr. Shikada agreed there must be a balance between interests of different
businesses and the interest of the City for activation of the street.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted a program that maximized the economic
activity in the area and a phased in approach for fees.  He appreciated the
comparisons regarding fee structure of neighboring jurisdictions but noted
that the proposed fee for Palo Alto was significantly higher.  Also, the program
should ensure activation of the sidewalks instead of folks walking down the
center of the street. 
Council Member Kou wanted to know if high rents are the cause of landlords
not being able to rent their space. 
Ms. Tanner concurred that could be a factor and recommended those be taken
on a case by case basis. 
Vice Mayor Kou encouraged Staff to explore all factors as to why a storefront
is vacant.  She wanted to understand the process for deep cleaning California
Avenue. 
Ms. Tanner confirmed additional cleaning was happening on a weekly and
monthly basis.  
Mr. Eggleston added traditionally before the street closures, the streets were
swept and received blower work three times a week for California Avenue and
downtown.  He noted Staff has not been able to maintain the cleanliness
standards in some areas due to street furniture.  A permanent program would
consider an acceptable fee that covered the additional Staffing needs for
cleaning.  
Vice Mayor Kou added that additional fire and police Staff will need to be
considered for a permanent program as well.  She asked how other cities do
their cleaning. 
Ms. Tanner commented that other cities do not require parklets to be removed
for street cleaning and many cities have a similar street sweeping schedule as
Palo Alto.  She suggested that a parklet permit holder maintain the cleanliness
of the hard to reach areas themselves. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Ms. Gabel-Scheinbaum articulated she would reach out to other jurisdictions
to understand their cleaning operations. 
PUBLIC COMMENT
John Shenk, Thoits Brothers, remarked the downtown is at its best when it is
full of diverse shops and food establishments.  All business establishments
should be allowed to use the parklet program while the rest of the downtown
needs visibility and parking.  The City should continue to enforce the existing
rules while evaluating the streets for an expanded program.  He requested
that the City not micromanage the use of heaters and to work with owners on
the happenings in front of their storefronts. 
Nancy Coupal agreed that the COVID- 19 Pandemic was not over and the City
faced an endemic situation.  The City should follow public wishes for public
property and facilitate more parklets and walkable streets.  Any fees should
be used for the purpose of the business to remain in business.  
She
encouraged a process that allowed the City to decide on a parklet permit
approval that had not received a letter of support from adjacent building
owners. 
Rebecca Eisenberg expressed concern that there were no business owners
speaking during public comment, only landlords.  She echoed the comment
that a vibrant downtown includes a diverse set of businesses.  The parklets
are a great idea if they are implemented appropriately and the closure of the
streets was the best solution. 
Council Member DuBois suggested the Council consider whether the goal was
to provide parklets that are all-weather indoor space or outdoor dining.  He
found it interesting that many of the parklets take up four or more parking
spaces.  Staff should explore parklet programs that were implemented before
the COVID-19 Pandemic.  The City of San Diego’s parklet program had many
useful components that were established pre-pandemic that the City should
consider.  With respect to aesthetics, there should be different rules for open
streets versus closed streets.  He supported Staff’s recommendation there be
no tents or canopies and to phase out the use of propane gas.  
He
recommended the use of astroturf be not allowed, that planters be used as
barriers, there be a neutral color palette and a 36-inch barrier height limit.  
He expressed concern about parklets in other parts of the city causing impacts
with respect to lighting and that parklets should not have a lot of signage.  
Also, he did not support allowing a business to have both a Sidewalk
Encroachment Permit as well as a Parklet Permit.  With respect to street use, 
it should be clear that parklets should not be allowed in handicap spaces, bus
zones, loading spaces, curb ramps,  etc.  The Staff Report was silent on
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
parking demand and how much available parking there was in the downtown
areas.  The City should act as a property manager and lease the space with
the understanding of how much inventory there is.  He noted some cities
implemented a restriction of how many parking spaces could be used per
street.  With respect to zoning, parklets located within a historic district should
be subject to a historic review.  There was confusion on who determined where
a parklet should be located.  Two options were to limit the determination to
the applicant or that the City lease the spaces completely separate from the
storefronts.  If the City pursued a management role, then lease terms, 
enforcement and remedies should be considered. 
Council
Member
Filseth
acknowledged
that outdoor
dining
was strongly
supported in the City and should be extended.  
He supported allowing
businesses to serve alcohol outside if they are permitted to serve it inside and
that more bicycle parking be installed.  With respect to sidewalls, the City
should determine whether the parklet is an extension of the indoor space or
whether the parklets are an experience for dinners.  He inquired if it is best
practice to not allow parklets to encroach in front of neighboring businesses. 
Ms. Gabel-Scheinbaum restated that cities that allow extension of the parklet
beyond the storefront required a letter of support or acknowledgment from
neighboring businesses.  The majority of cities with a permanent program had
those provisions.  
Council Member Filseth predicted the process would be complicated because
there may be an agreement but then tenants may change.  To make it more
fair the City may have to become the landlord.  He echoed the comment that
there is a difference between open and closed streets, that folks should be
walking on the sidewalks and the need to understand the impact of lost
parking spaces.  
Council Member Stone appreciated Staff’s acknowledgement of having a fee
that offsets the management costs while keeping it reasonable for applicants.  
He asked if Staff knew what the management costs would be for a permanent
program. 
Ms. Tanner remarked there was discussion of having a half of a full time
equivalent ( FTE) Staffing position to manage the program. 
Council Member Stone wanted to understand what fee amount was needed to
cover the half FTE. 
Ms. Tanner answered Staff did not have the answer but would continue to
discuss and evaluate it. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Council Member Stone noted moving forward it would be helpful to have a
better understanding of that.  He acknowledged and agreed that the City will
be receiving additional Sale Tax revenue as well as many other community
benefits.  He asked if retailers could apply for a Parklet Permit. 
Ms. Tanner commented the proposal was for restaurant use but the Council
could recommend that other uses be allowed to use parklets. 
Council Member Stone pressed if other cities allowed that. 
Ms. Tanner noted some cities allowed other uses to have parklets.  Some
businesses choose to use them as a public amenity with a swing or a bench
instead of for their business. 
Ms. Gabel- Scheinbaum added gyms used their parklets for fitness classes
during the pandemic.  For the majority of cities in the State of California the
use of a parklet was limited to restaurant use. 
Council Member Stone encouraged Staff to explore allowing other uses to use
parklets to promote equity.  He wanted to understand why Staff proposed that
a business seek approval from the adjacent business owner as well as the
building owner for extended parklets. 
Ms. Tanner restated that a property owner may have difficulty finding a tenant
due to an extended parklet in front of the vacant space. 
Mr. Eggleston clarified the temporary ordinance did not allow anyone to object
to an extension of a parklet but Staff was proposing that the permanent
ordinance include that language. 
Council Member Stone saw the logic of allowing an adjacent business owner
to object to an extended parklet but he could not support allowing a property
owner the same right. 
Council Member Cormack stated the proposal was not only an economic
decision.  The parklets added visual interest to the streets and provided a
more community experience instead of an individual experience.  She found
it appropriate to apply high standards to the parklets because they provided
a lot of visual aesthetics to the community.  A semi-permanent change to the
landscape will be expensive but the City should require electric heaters instead
of propane.  The City must continue
to enforce
the 8-foot
sidewalk
requirement as well as disable parking, loading zones and bicycle parking.  
She supported real vegetation in the barriers, no artificial turf and colorful
accents.  She wanted to better understand the differences in the guidelines
for closed and open streets.  A one year lease term may be too short if the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
businesses are making investments and the City is managing the leases.  With
respect to extended parklets, one option was to allow adjacent businesses the
right of first refusal.  If the store decided not to use the space then the space
should be made available to whoever wants to use it.  With respect to fees, 
Staff provided a wide range of figures without any explanation of them. 
Ms. Tanner explained that Council could consider using a fraction of the
parking space value for the fee instead of the full $25 per day.  
Mr. Kamhi mentioned the $25 per day amount was the City’s current parking
price for the City-owned parking garages and lots. 
Ms. Tanner noted the Council could also recommend a fraction amount for the
rental rate average instead of the full amount. 
Mayor Burt reminded the Council that one of the 2022 Council Priorities was
economic recovery and transition.  The Stanford Shopping Center businesses
have been very busy and their parking spaces were hundreds of yards away
from the shops.  This showed what a well designed pedestrian environment
could do to attract more folks to the shopping center.  He answered Council
Member Filseth’s question that the spaces should be considered as an
additional experience for dinners.  He did not support a rental rate that was
collaborated to indoor lease rates but rather a fee that used annual parking
rates.  The rates should also consider the additional revenue the City will be
receiving as a result of the increased retail sales.  The City should explore how
to help retailers more with marketing and additional wayfinding signs.  He
encouraged allowing retailers to have a parklet but cautioned about having
pop up businesses that competed with existing retailers.  For rental fees he
supported a 2-year implementation process.  He suggested the ARB reconsider
a number of aspects they recommended including a neutral color palette.  He
encouraged the Council to provide direction quickly so that businesses could
move forward with their designs but understood that many of the concepts
would have to be taken up at a later time.  Enforcement on California Avenue
should be strengthened.  He believed Staff misinterpreted the Council’s motion
and expanded the motion to property owners instead of keeping it only to
business owners. 
Council Member Tanaka acknowledged that handling the transition period will
be challenging.  Many businesses had already invested large sums of dollars
for their parklets and now they were being asked to change them. 
Ms. Tanner agreed that businesses have already made significant investments
and the proposals intended to be low-cost changes. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Mr. Shikada recommended the Council provide clarity about the future state
of the parklets.  That direction would facilitate discussions with businesses on
how to move forward. 
Council Member Tanaka believed the right step was to allow propane heaters
during the transition phase.  He agreed there was a lack of bicycle parking in
the area and that design standards needed to be implemented.  If retailers
were allowed to use parklets they could attract customers to their shop.  He
encouraged the City to explore how to manage parking demand and to include
the property owners in curating the space to create a more vibrant street. 
Vice Mayor Kou aligned her comments with Council Member Filseth and
Council Member DuBois.  She believed it was true and necessary to have a
diverse set of shops downtown as well as ensure compliance and enforcement
of the rules.  She supported ARB’s recommendations and emphasized that
deliveries and loading must be taken into consideration.  Any fee that is set
should cover Staff time as well as maintenance and repairs of the street.  She
encouraged planters as barriers with more greenery and flowers.  The parklet
permit holder should be responsible for any trash, debris and cleaning near
their space.  She strongly opposed the use of the sidewalks for signage and
seating.  Pedestrians must have a safe and clear pathway.  Also, businesses
and the City should discourage the use of trees as bike storage.  In conclusion
she supported the requested extension to allow ARB to further explore the
design guidelines. 
Council Member DuBois believed if the City does not charge market rent but
allows a store front to have a parklet.  Eventually the property owner will
capture the value in incremental rent.  The City should manage the leases and
capture the value for the taxpayers.  He found the construction rate and daily
rate not useful.  The Parking In Lieu Fee was more reasonable in that the fee
structure required an owner to pay a nominal amount annually.  The Council
should consider what the cost is to privatize the public land.  He imagined a
vendor renting a parklet without having a store front and that type of use
should be allowed.  The temporary ordinance should be updated to include
items that will be required in the future such as the removal of the temporary
tents. 
Mayor Burt cautioned on requiring temporary tents to be removed while the
City discussed whether to extend the parklets to the future or not. 
Council Member DuBois emphasized that restaurants could continue outdoor
dining but without an enclosed tent. 
ORIGINAL MOTION:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Vice
Mayor Kou to direct staff to update the temporary ordinance to notify of the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
intention to disallow upon the effective date of a permanent ordinance the use
of vinyl, tents or canopies; prohibit parklets from blocking handicapped or
curb ramps, state a strong preference for plants as barriers; shift to 36” in
height; prohibit new parklets from having these characteristics; and ask staff
to prepare pre-approved designs as part of the permanent ordinance; 
Council Member DuBois stated it is important to start to move towards
requirements that will be included in a permanent ordinance.  
Council Member Stone stated now was not the time to discontinue the use of
tents or canopies. 
Ms. Tanner explained the tents along California Avenue were not included in
the existing Parklet Program.  Staff could begin providing notices to businesses
that tents and canopies will not be allowed in the future. 
Mr. Shikada requested clarification on how long the transition phase will be in
place.  He predicted that businesses would not remove their tents until final
parklet guidelines are adopted. 
Council Member DuBois wanted to provide a notice of intent to allow time for
folks to transition to the new guidelines. 
Mayor Burt suggested to provide clarity on what will not be allowed in the
permanent ordinance. 
Council Member DuBois agreed and updated the motion.  He asked if there
had been any recent parklet applications.  
Mr. Nafziger answered that Staff received two applications recently and one
or two others in the past month. 
Council Member DuBois inquired what requirements would new applications
follow. 
Mayor Burt understood Staff would apply the new rules to the new application.  
He asked if the motion should include language about adjacent property
owners prohibiting parklets. 
Council Member DuBois declined to include that language in the motion.  He
believed it should be up to the City to decide where a parklet should be
located. 
PROPOSED AMENDMENT: Motion by Mayor Burt, Seconded by Council Member
Stone to incorporate: Until adoption of a permanent ordinance, property
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
owners do not have the right to determine the use of the public space in front
of their properties
Mayor Burt recommended the requirement be in place until Council could
discuss the permanent ordinance. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to understand how the amendment would
affect Ramona Street. 
Mr. Eggleston remarked the ordinance would remove the language about a
property owner objecting to a parklet but continue to allow adjacent business
owners to voice objection. 
Council Member Cormack supported the amendment. 
Council Member DuBois understood that store owners could object to having
a parklet in front of their space. 
Mayor Burt confirmed that is correct. 
Council Member DuBois wanted to understand why a store owner should have
the continued right to determine the use of public space. 
Mayor Burt emphasized the amendment
was in alignment with Council’s
motion made in September of 2021.  The amendment would give Staff
discretion on whether a parklet application should be approved or not. 
Council Member Filseth supported the amendment for the interim period but
recommended
Council
revisit the topic during the permanent
ordinance
discussion.  If there was a dispute between the property owner and the tenant.  
The property owner will win and he could not see how the amendment
provided any protection to the tenant in that scenario. 
Council Member Stone agreed the amendment was especially important for
the interim ordinance because it provided consistency for business owners. 
Council Member Tanaka echoed Council Member Filseth’s comment.  He
inquired if the amendment would create any legal issues for the City. 
City Attorney Molly Stump did not foresee any legal concerns arising with the
amendment.  Property owners could provide input to the City if they have any
concerns.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted the ordinance to be fair for both parties and
agreed that the amendment
would not be sufficient for the permanent
ordinance.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Mayor Burt understood from the September 2021 motion that if a neighboring
business opposed.  Staff has the prerogative to determine whether there was
interference.  If there was no interference then the neighboring business did
not have the right to object. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-1, Tanaka No
Council Member Cormack provided clean up remarks to the main motion. 
Mayor Burt inquired if the motion should include items for new parklets as well
as items that should not be allowed under the permanent ordinance. 
Council Member DuBois stated if there is agreement among the full Council
then the items should be included in the motion. 
Council Member Cormack stated the motion was updating the guidelines, it
was prohibiting items for new parklets and was placing items in the permanent
ordinance. 
Council Member DuBois remarked the permanent ordinance will be discussed
at a future time. 
Council Member Cormack requested that Item D state that electric heaters be
required for new parklets.  
Mayor Burt agreed but was not comfortable providing that direction at this
time.  
Council Member Cormack rephrased her request for Item D.  She inquired if
Council needed to provide more direction to the ARB. 
Ms. Tanner clarified that Staff will continue working with the ARB on refining
the standards.  
MOTION:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Kou to
direct staff to: 
A. Adopt the interim ordinance and resolution; 
B. Update the guidelines for new temporary parklets and incorporate into
the permanent ordinance the following: 
I. 
Prohibit use of vinyl, tents or canopies;  
II. 
Prohibit parklets from blocking handicapped or curb ramps
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
III. 
State a preference for plants as barriers;  
IV. 
Shift to a maximum of 36” in enclosure height;  
C. Consider pre-approved designs as part of the permanent ordinance;  
D. Until adoption of a permanent ordinance, property owners do not have
the right to determine the use of the public space in front of their
properties; and
E. Research and return with more information on electric heating options
for the permanent ordinance
Council Member Tanaka noted that the motion did not specify that the item
will be extended through the summer. 
Mayor Burt clarified the temporary ordinance would be extended through
December but the City intended to adopt a permanent ordinance before the
expiration. 
Ms. Tanner confirmed that is correct. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if existing parklets are allowed to block
handicapped ramps. 
Ms. Tanner answered no. 
Mayor Burt clarified it has happened. 
Ms. Tanner restated that handicap rules, regulations and access should be
enforced.  
Council Member Tanaka asked if there were platforms that allowed handicap
access. 
Mr. Shikada answered that it was not a typical design. 
Council Member Tanaka commented that on some streets the spaces are not
symmetrical in size.  He asked if the City should explore centering the street. 
Mayor Burt interjected that centering the street would not be part of the
interim ordinance and suggested it be brought up during the permanent
ordinance discussion. 
Mayor Burt mentioned there are superior barrier designs that do not include
planters.  He recommended the ARB explore barrier designs further. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 21 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Council took a short break] 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
11. 
Approve and Authorize City Manager to Execute Non-Binding Letter
of Intent with First Tee Silicon Valley Towards Establishing a Public
Private Partnership for Practice Facility Infrastructure Improvements
at the Baylands Golf Links and Long- Term Facility Use Access for the
First Tee Silicon Valley’s Youth Development Teaching Program
City Manager Ed Shikada shared that Council adopted a policy that allowed
the City to pursue unsolicited proposals for use of City facilities in June of
2021.   
Superintendent of Public Facilities Lam Do reported from 2009 to present, 
the City worked collaboratively with First Tee Silicon Valley ( FTSV) to
promote youth development, life skills and core values.  Between 250 to
300 youth from
Palo Alto and surrounding
jurisdictions
participated
annually at the Baylands
Golf Links.  
FTSV proposed to expand the
program’s enrollment to 1,000 youth per year at the Baylands Golf Link
and begin a new outreach program with an enrollment of 5,000 youth. 
President and CEO of Baylands Golf Links George Moxy reported FTSV was
celebrating 25-years of serving youth across 148 chapters nationwide.  
FTSV was established in Silicon Valley in 1999 in the City of San Jose and
then expanded to other cities within the Valley.  All kids were welcome to
attend the programs regardless of their ability to pay.  The classes were
the heart of the program and were held once a week for 8-weeks, four
seasons of the year.  
FTSV had 35 paid employees with over 100
volunteers.  The outreach program to schools and youth organizations
helped introduce golf to kids who may not have access to the game.  The
Baylands Golf Link was the only course that could be sectioned off to allow
for FTSV’s programming.  FTSV proposed to invest $500,000 annually for
classes and $100,000 for outreach.  FTSV would not use the youth area at
the Baylands Golf Link more than 30 percent of the time and proposed that
the operator offer the space to other youth organizations and schools.  
FTSV requested that the Council define community benefits for residential
rates for Palo Alto and East Palo Alto residents as well as provide discounted
rates for seniors, juniors, FTSV participants and families.  The proposal was
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 22 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
for FTSV to raise funding to raise the existing driving range netting, add
protective netting along Embarcadero Road and complete the youth area.  
FTSV received approval from the Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA) to
install higher nets.  FTSV would leverage funding from its trustee program
as well as seek donations for the program.  If the proposal is successful, 
FTSV will pursue a facility with a training structure and offices in the future. 
Mr. Do restated FTSV was seeking a Letter of Intent toward establishing a
public/ private partnership.  The Letter of Intent will facilitate discussions
on
developing the partnership and Staff will return to Council within 18-
months to discuss facility use, construction plans and partnership terms.  
The
partnership
would
provide
benefits
to
the
community
through
infrastructure improvements, open up underutilized areas at the golf
course, establish Baylands Golf Link as FTSV’s home in the Mid-Peninsula
and further establish youth participation in golf.  The Parks and Recreation
Commission recommended
Staff seek a Letter of Intent from the City
Council. 
PUBLIC COMMENT
Rebecca Eisenberg spoke in favor of the item.  FTSV had a proven track
record of providing a large range of benefits to diverse communities.  
Shani Kleinhaus spoke on behalf of the Sierra Club and the Santa Clara
County Audubon Society.  She requested that the City ensure that all
parties be informed of existing mitigations for the wetlands and trees at
the golf course.  Before any infrastructure projects could take place, the
City must work with the regulatory agencies and review the Conditions of
Approval set forth by the Army Corps of Engineers.  Any infrastructure
changes should be done in compliance with the Baylands Master Plan and
the Palo Alto Baylands Nature Preserve Design Guidelines. 
Aram James wanted to understand if there was enough space at the
Baylands Golf Link to build a miniature golf course. 
Council Member Cormack inquired if the City was responsible for the
fencing in the youth area. 
Mr. Do confirmed that is correct.  The improvements would increase the
maintenance budget.  FTSV’s proposal was to provide resources for the
initial construction and then renew the partnership later to include a cost
share component. 
Council Member Cormack asked if FTSV had done a feasibility study that
would give Council reassurance that the funds could be raised. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 23 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Mr. Moxy answered no but there had been discussions with donors as well
as the precedent set by the City of San Francisco and the City of Monterey
and their facilities.  
Council Member Cormack wanted to know if changes would have to be
made to the City’s Naming Policy. 
Mr. Do noted the present proposal did not include any name changes. 
Council Member DuBois asked if there were any planned impacts to trees. 
Mr. Do answered no because the new fencing would be contained within
the existing turfed areas. 
Council Member DuBois shared he did not know the City was considering a
two-level driving range. 
Mr. Do explained in the Fiscal Year 2023 Budget Staff requested funding to
hire a consultant to do a feasibility study for a second level at the driving
range. 
Council
Member
DuBois
understood
that
FTSV
would
do
the
initial
fundraising for construction.  Then FTSV and the City would enter into an
agreement regarding a cost sharing for operations. 
Mr. Do
clarified
the
City
would
continue
to
provide
the
monthly
maintenance of the facility.  When repairs were needed to the infrastructure
then the City and FTSV would negotiate a cost share plan. 
Council Member DuBois wanted to know if FTSV paid rent in other cities.  
Mr. Moxy answered FTSV paid an access fee per participant per 8-week
class per season.  He emphasized that a long-term agreement was crucial
for fundraising. 
Council Member DuBois announced his support for the proposal and
appreciated that the public use would not be impacted.  He encouraged the
City to complete the Roth Building lease before working on the FTSV
agreement. 
Council Member Stone inquired what outreach did FTSV provide to Palo Alto
students. 
Mr. Moxy remarked it was minimal because of the long wait lists and FTSV
did not want to increase demand when there was no place for the kids to
play. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 24 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Council Member Stone wanted to know if the proposal would allow for
significant expansion.  
Mr. Moxy explained that over half the kids were 2nd through 4th graders
and they would be placed in the youth area rather than spread around the
golf course.  This would also allow FTSV to hold Saturday classes which
were currently not in the existing program. 
Council Member Stone encouraged a greater focus to reach more Palo Alto
students.  He understood the practice areas would be available to the public
when FTSV was not using it. 
Mr. Do answered yes and the new youth area would be constructed in an
underutilized area of the course. 
MOTION:  Council Member Stone moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to
approve the letter of intent for establishing a partnership with First Tee
Silicon Valley Youth Development Teaching Program. 
Council
Member
Stone
agreed
FTSV
is an incredible
program, well
recognized and the proposal was consistent with Council’s priority of public
health and safety. 
Mayor Burt agreed the proposal fitted into several Council priorities that
were held over the years.  He found the proposal an exciting opportunity
to partner with community partners and leverage resources.  He noted
adding an additional level to the driving range was included in the long-
term master plan for the golf course. 
Council Member Filseth agreed the proposal was an excellent use of the
facility.  He wanted to know in the near future how much of an increase for
maintenance would the City be responsible for. 
Council Member Tanaka asked what the $4 million would be used for. 
Mr. Moxy explained it would be used for the netting and building out the
youth area. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired how much folks paid to use the driving
range. 
Mr. Do disclosed that participants bought different bucket sizes full of golf
balls and they ranged from $6 to $15. 
Council Member Tanaka understood FTSV would have discounted fees to
use the driving range. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 25 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Mr. Do clarified that fees would be negotiated over the next 18-months.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to understand FTSV’s wholesale rate
versus the retail rate. 
Mr. Do answered it was hard to provide a range. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired if Palo Alto students had any special
access to the program.  
Mr. Do mentioned the golf course supported the girls and boys high school
golf teams for both Palo Alto High School and Gunn High School.  The
proposal did not prioritize Palo Alto youth over youth from other cities. 
Council Member Tanaka expressed interest in understanding more about
how to include more Palo Alto youth into the program.  
Vice Mayor Kou wanted to understand the shared partnership percentages
for each entity. 
Mr. Do explained that 30 percent of the youth practice area would be used
by FTSV during the 8-week sessions. 
Vice Mayor Kou understood the modifications to the site were away from
the sensitive nature areas. 
Mr. Do confirmed that is correct. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if the mitigations placed during the golf course
rebuild were completed. 
Mr. Do concurred that the mitigation were completed but the monitoring
portions of the mitigation were not completed. 
Vice Mayor Kou was very supportive of the program and agreed it fell within
many of the Council’s priorities. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
12. 
Report on Palo Alto's Response to Hate Crimes and Hate Incidents, 
and
Discussion
of
the
Policy
and
Services
Committee
Recommendation
that
the
City
Council
Consider
the
Idea
of
Developing a Misdemeanor Ordinance to Deter Hateful Speech and
Support the Human Relations Commission ( HRC) to Bring the FBI and
Community Resources to Palo Alto to do Community Education on
Hate Crimes
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 26 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Deputy City Manager Chantal Cotton-Gaines reported at the September 14, 
2021 Policy and Service Committee ( P&S) meeting, the Committee directed
Staff to explore a Hate Crime Ordinance.  The Human Relations Commission
HRC) voted on March 10, 2022 to support a recommendation to bring the FBI
and community resources to Palo Alto to do community education on hate
crimes. 
City Attorney Molly Stump summarized that California State Law criminalized
acts motivated by hate or hate speech that constituted a criminal threat.  
Beyond that, speech was protected by the First Amendment. Local and state
governments could not punish First Amendment protected speech but could
take actions to encourage tolerance and civility as well as provide education
around rights, available resources and support for folks harmed by hateful
speech. 
Ms. Cotton-Gaines mentioned that the City had employed several strategies
to address hate crimes and hate incidents. Staff recommended the Council
support the HRC bringing in the FBI and community resources to further
community education on hate crimes.  Also, to consider supporting hate crime
legislation such as Assembly Bill (AB) 1947. 
PUBLIC COMMENT
Aram James mentioned the FBI had a long history of hate crimes against
persons of color and opposed having them come to the community.  Also, 
there was no legal basis to have a stand alone hate ordinance in Palo Alto.  
Rebecca Eisenberg echoed Mr. James’ comment about not bringing the FBI in
to speak to community members about hate crimes. 
Kat Snyder agreed with the Staff Report that a City ordinance against hate
speech would be unconstitutional and ineffective.  She encouraged the HRC
and the Palo Alto Libraries to work together to educate the community by
using prior HRC work about hate crimes. 
Bob Moss ( in person) acknowledged that many hate crimes were under-
reported and the first step was to encourage folks to file a report when there
was an incident.  
Also, to educate the community about the resources
available if they are a victim of a hate crime. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Stone to
receive the report, support the Human Relations Commission to bring the FBI
and/ or other community
resources
to
Palo Alto to further
community
education on hate crimes and support hate crimes legislation ( Assembly Bill
1947).  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 27 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Vice Mayor Kou inquired if the motion should include language that Council
was not directing Staff to develop a hate crime ordinance.  
Ms. Stump answered no. 
Vice Mayor Kou remarked that the Constitution is clear that people have the
right to freedom
of speech.  
She supported
having
more community
awareness and using past programs as resources. 
Council
Member
Stone
believed
that
pure
hate
speech
and
the
First
Amendment was a gray area.  There have been many Supreme Court rulings
identifying speech that rises to the level of pure hate speech.  He supported
AB 1947 and believed California Law should provide more protection.  He
mentioned he completed the FBI Citizens Academy that focused on building
community relationships with the FBI.  Also, the FBI recently launched a new
strategic initiative to combat hate crimes which included community education
on how to report hate crimes.  He noted the FBI had vocally acknowledged
their troubled history in the past and he encouraged the community to move
forward. 
Council Member Cormack was surprised to see that P&S recommended the
City adopt a Hate Crime Ordinance but appreciated Staff’s suggestion not to
implement the ordinance.  She believed there was already a fair amount of
structure in place to prosecute hate crimes but the problem was that folks
were not reporting them.  She inquired what community outreach would the
FBI do. 
Human Services Manager Minka van der Zwaag explained Staff was setting up
a meeting with the FBI and HRC to hear more about their community
education program.  This was the first step in a potential multi-step outreach
initiative. 
Council Member Cormack would have rather seen training that educated folks
on what to do if they witnessed a hate crime rather than education that
focused on reporting and data.  She asked if AB 1947 would result in a huge
change in the way the City defined or responded to hate crimes. 
Assistant Police Chief Andrew Binder believed there would not be a big change.  
Council Member Cormack requested the motion remove the words FBI and
noted she was not prepared to identify who the City should partner with. 
Vice Mayor Kou agreed. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 28 of 28
Sp.) City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
05/ 09/ 2022
Council Member Stone recommended the motion to say FBI and/or other
community resources. 
Council Member Cormack agreed. 
Council Member Tanaka appreciated Staff’s work and given the discussion he
supported the motion.  He agreed with Council Member Stone’s comment
about freedom of speech. 
Council
Member
DuBois
asked if Staff had explored
easier
methods
of
reporting hate crimes. 
Mr. Binder explained the Palo Alto Police Department offered a variety of ways
to report a hate crime. 
Council
Member
DuBois
suggested
the
HRC
explore
and
provide
recommendations on how to increase hate crime incident reporting.  
Mr. Binder supported the recommendation to work with the HRC to remove
any barriers there might be to reporting.  
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements
Council Member DuBois commented that the May Fete Parade was excellent
and acknowledged that this was his first time seeing the Council designate a
new heritage tree.  
Mayor Burt reported that at the last Silicon Valley Transit Authority ( VTA) 
meeting the group voted on the first phase of a construction contract for the
tunneling of the Bay Area Regional Transit ( BART) system to the City of San
Jose.  VTA estimated the cost would be $6.9 billion but the federal government
estimated it to be closer to $9.1 billion.  Several San Jose representatives
recommended an independent review of the alternatives and the risk of the
project.  He countered the proposal by recommending an independent peer
review committee and that recommendation was accepted. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:14 P.M. 
