CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 21 
Special Meeting 
 
December 12, 2022 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Cormack, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Present Remotely:  
DuBois 
Absent: 
 
 
None 
 
Special Order of the Day 
AA1.  Sobrato Philanthropies  
Mayor Burt recognized Sobrato Philanthropies for their contributions to the 
community.  He stated he was familiar with the work they had done and 
their philanthropy center in Redwood City but was not aware of thew new 
center on West Bayshore until the Council was invited to visit this summer.  
The center serves 10 different nonprofits of Palo Alto and East Palo Alto and 
is one of 4 such centers.  Out of all the philanthropies and corporations in 
Silicon Valley, many significantly larger than Sobrato Corp, they are second 
only to Google in regional giving, and the for-profit corporation has been 
inverted and is designed and functioning to serve the philanthropy.  
Camille Yanas Notanina, Sobrato Philanthropies, shared the organization's 
mission to partner with communities to meet immediate needs, address 
systemic barriers, and pursue social justice to build a more equitable and 
sustainable world, guided by the business philosophy and the personal 
values of the Sobrato family.  Sobrato Philanthropies provides over $24M 
annually to a portfolio of 200 grantees and stewards over 330,000 square 
feet of office and programmatic space to the nonprofit sector in San Mateo, 
Santa Clara, and Southern Alameda Counties.  Since inception 25 years ago, 
over $36M has been given to organizations housed in the City of Palo Alto as 
well as another $10M in East Palo Alto.  This summer, the newest center was 
opened off Bayshore Road, with over 30,000 square feet of office space, 
home to 10 tenants that focus on issues related to housing, youth 
development, health services, and more.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
Lisa Sonsini, Sobrato Philanthropies, stated she felt blessed to be part of the 
Sobrato family, which has great connection and roots to this community and 
is very committed to giving back.  The real estate company has been in 
business since the 1950's, now having a lens to think about ways to have 
more impact with both the business and the philanthropic gifts.  She stated 
her father was looking forward to working in partnership with Palo Alto on 
the Navigation Center on San Antonio in connection with LifeMoves.  She 
expressed Sobrato's gratitude for all the City has done and their plan to 
remain committed to this community and the surrounding communities.   
Council Member Cormack was grateful for the quiet dedication Sobrato 
Philanthropies has shown to nonprofits.  She also appreciated the fact that 
the family and organization is willing to be slightly more public now, which 
demonstrates leadership that others in this community will follow.   
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE 
WITH 
LABOR 
NEGOTIATORS 
 
City 
Designated 
Representatives: City Manager and his Designees Pursuant to Merit 
System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada, Kiely Nose, Sandra Blanch, 
Nicholas Raisch, Molly Stump, and Terence Howzell); Employee 
Organization: Service Employees International Union (SEIU) Local 521, 
Utilities Management and Professional Association of Palo Alto 
(UMPAPA), Palo Alto Police Officers' Association (PAPOA), Palo Alto 
Police Management Association (PMA), International Association of Fire 
Fighters (IAFF) Local 1319, Palo Alto Fire Chiefs Association (FCA); 
Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6 (a) 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Burt, to go 
into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:20 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:11 P.M. 
Mayor Burt announced there were no reportable actions.  
Agenda Changes, Additions, and Deletions 
There were none. 
Public Comment  
There was none. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
Consent Calendar 
2. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of an Ordinance Extending the Term of 
Ordinance No. 5517 by an Additional 18 Months to Expire on June 16, 
2024. Ordinance 5517 Amends Title 18 (Zoning) of the Palo Alto 
Municipal Code to Update Definitions, Broaden Permitted Uses, and 
Provide Limits on Certain Uses through Updates to the Conditional Use 
Permit 
Thresholds. 
 
Environmental 
Review: 
CEQA 
Exemption 
15061(b)(3) (FIRST READING: November 28, 2022, PASSED 6-1, 
Cormack No) 
3. 
Utilities Advisory Commission Recommend the City Council Affirm the 
Continuation of the REC Exchange Program 
4. 
Approval of Amendment No. 1 to Contract C09124501 with 
GreenWaste of Palo Alto for Collection and Processing Services to 
Implement Domestic Recycling of Mixed Paper and Mixed Rigid Plastics 
with Program Annual Costs Not to Exceed $1.2M and Approval of 
Budget Amendment in the Refuse Fund Supplemental Report Added 
5. 
Approval of Contract S20178749 Amendment No. 3 with LCT Software, 
LLC, in the Amount of $72,924 for a New Not-to-Exceed Amount of 
$247,254 for Electronic Document Review Software Related to the 
City’s Land Use and Permitting System through December 31, 2023 
6. 
Approval of Lease and License of 300 Homer Avenue, Roth Building, 
between the City of Palo Alto and the Palo Alto Museum 
7. 
Appointment of Kiely Nose as Assistant City Manager 
8. 
Approval of a Contract with Nomad Transit, LLC, (Via) for City of Palo 
Alto On-Demand Transit Service in a Total Contract Amount Not to 
Exceed $2,500,000 for Up to 2 Years and Approval of a Budget 
Amendment in the General Fund (Late Packet Report Added) 
Council Member Cormack registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 2. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Numbers 4, 6, 
and 7. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Burt, to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 2-8. 
Motion split for the purpose of voting 
Motion Passes for Item 2: 6-1, Cormack no 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
Motion Passes for Item 4, 6, 7: 6-1, Tanaka no 
Motion Passes for Items 3, 5, 8: 7-0 
Council Member Tanaka stated the trash rate for Palo Alto for a 13-gallon 
container is $50 a month, and in Mountain View, it is $39 a month.  Number 
4 increases cost by another $500,000.  Palo Alto already has very high rates 
compared to neighbors, so adding additional cost does not make sense.  He 
did not support Number 4.  Regarding Number 6, he stated land in Palo Alto 
is precious and expensive and should be used in the most useful, efficient 
manner possible.  He did not believe the use planned for Number 6 would do 
that and preferred finding a better utility for this land, perhaps earning 
market rents or a youth center.  On Number 7, he appreciated the Director's 
work but felt the City was top heavy with too much administration and not 
enough workers.  He would prefer the budget be used for more services 
provided to constituents and felt it was not appropriate to staff additional 
people in the City Manager's office. 
City Manager Comments 
 
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, thanked City Council for approval on Item 
Number 7 on the consent calendar and asked Ms. Nose to address the 
Council.   
Kiely Nose, Assistant City Manger, stated she looked forward to the work 
ahead in this new role and appreciated the opportunity to continue her 
professional career with the City of Palo Alto.  She stated her time with the 
City has continued to be dynamic, ever challenging, and rewarding, with the 
opportunity to further key projects through evolving economic shifts and 
priorities.  She was excited to be part of a strong leadership team and was 
committed to serve as a collaborative and strategic partner to the team.  
She looked forward to getting more involved working with community 
stakeholders and regional partners and agencies in core business areas, 
such as Utilities.  She also thanked City Manager Shikada for his mentorship 
and patience.   
City Manager Shikada shared a coronavirus update, including availability of 
vaccinations.  He discussed storm response over the past weekend and felt 
the few responses needed were a testament to the strong preparation by the 
Public Works Staff.  There is an expectation of high natural gas prices this 
winter, and there are efficiency tips on the City's website to reduce the use 
of natural gas.  There are several surveys available on the website for 
residents of Palo Alto.  He described a holiday craft workshop on California 
Avenue to be held Saturday, December 17.  He listed notable upcoming 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
Council items, including Fiber to the Premises and Council Procedures and 
Protocols on December 19.   
Action Items 
9. 
Approval of Amendment No. 1 to Contract C21180078 with Blue Rhino 
Studios, Inc., in the Amount of $234,748 for Design and Fabrication of 
Additional Dinosaur Sculptures and Exhibits for the Palo Alto Junior 
Museum and Zoo for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $449,464.  
Environmental Review: CEQA Exemption 15301. 
Kristen O’Kane, Community Services Department, summarized key points of 
this item.  Several exhibits were included in the Junior Museum & Zoo 
planning effort, all completed with the exception of the dinosaur garden that 
is the subject of this action item.  The JMZ Capital Improvement Projects 
include funding for exhibits at the museum, both indoors and outdoors.  
Over half of the exhibition cost is funded by outside contributors.  The 
Friends of the JMZ contributed $300,000 from local donors in the 
community, and there was also a federal grant of $250,000.  Regarding the 
timing, it is common for museums to experience a decline in visitation at 
around 2 years, so there was an intent to delay a new exhibit to bring back 
that excitement.  This will add some exhibits to an underutilized space 
outside of the JMZ in the courtyard and will also include a hands-on fossil dig 
for kids.  This is the second phase of the dinosaur exhibit.  While the first 
items were being fabricated, Staff consulted with accessibility coordinators, 
scientific advisors, and JMZ visitors to understand what they were looking for 
in this exhibit.   
Council Member Stone clarified that the additional request of $234,758 was 
not because the original cost of refurbishing the 3 large dinosaurs increased 
but was to incorporate the design and fabrication of other elements.  The 
City has a commitment through contractual obligation in the Facilities 
Agreement to fund the new exhibits, a commitment to comply with the 
federal grant the Council accepted in 2020 to construct the exhibit, and an 
obligation to the Friends of the JMZ for their generous donations.  He was 
concerned about the precedence this would set for future efforts to form 
public-private partnerships if the City did not honor these commitments.  He 
was happy to support this item.  He thought it was a great exhibit and 
seemed like a great way to get museum attendance up.  He was also not 
aware of any similar exhibits in the region and thought it was a great way to 
attract out-of-town visitors 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Stone, to approve an amendment (Attachment A) to the Professional 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
Services Agreement (C21180078) with Blue Rhino Studios, Inc. to increase 
the contract in the amount of $234,758 for a total not-to-exceed amount of 
$449,464 for fabrication of dinosaur sculptures and exhibits for the Palo Alto 
Junior Museum and Zoo (JMZ) "California Dinosaur Garden" Exhibition 
Project, Capital Improvement Program Project AC-18001. 
Council Member Filseth asked how many dinosaurs the exhibit would have if 
this was approved.   
Ms. O'Kane stated there would be 8 total. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the original plan and budget was for 8.   
John Aikin, Senior Manager of Junior Museum & Zoo, stated the design 
originally considered even more dinosaurs but over time with public 
feedback and budgetary concerns, it was settled on 8.  There were 3 original 
large dinosaurs with long lead times for fabrication that were begun early as 
the rest of the exhibit was developed.  There were always going to be more 
exhibits, including interactive exhibits for kids.   
Council Member Filseth asked when the decision to go from 3 to 8 was 
made.   
Mr Aikin believed it was about a year and a half ago.   
Vice Mayor Kou appreciated the need to fulfill the agreement with the 
Friends of the JMZ but was concerned about future exhibits needed in order 
to get attendance and wanted more details with more oversight about the 
money going to the JMZ.  She stated she was unhappy when the JMZ 
wanted to expand and take away parkland and now more money is going 
into the new facilities.  She wanted to see a plan or an audit before pouring 
more money in to the museum, though thought it was an asset to the City. 
Council Member Tanaka stated he was concerned after hearing about the 
financial concerns.  He wanted to understand the plan to make this 
sustainable economically, whether building an exhibit every 2 years, better 
marketing, higher or lower prices.  He stated it is for a certain age range of 
kids and then the kids move on.  He was unsure that doubling the number of 
dinosaurs would bring a lot more traffic.   
Ms. O'Kane stated this money was already budgeted in the Capital 
Improvement Project for exhibitions at the JMZ.  It would not be drawing 
from another source of funding that would have gone to something else.  
The staff report includes a plan to do an operating model and business plan 
for the JMZ, which is already underway.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
Council Member Tanaka stated there was an opportunity to do an analysis 
and find out whether the dinosaurs would be the most efficient use of 
money.  Maybe the analysis would find something else, that the best use is 
for better signage or more programs with schools.  He questioned how 
doubling the dinosaurs will increase traffic.   
Mr. Aikin stated there are a number of things that cause people to come to 
the Junior Museum and Zoo, which is a ticketed venue in competition with 
lots of other available venues in the Bay Area.  Those choices are usually 
based on whether they trust the institution; whether they value what the 
institution offers, animals or dinosaurs; and whether the experience they 
have had is worth repeating.  In surveys of the public on the design so far, 
the input has been phenomenal.  People want to come and see this exhibit.  
A challenge is having limited capacity, so having a rich experience makes it 
worth it for people.  This all leads to consistent high attendance over time.   
Council Member DuBois thought the timing right before a public vote on new 
taxes was not great.  The Finance Committee reviewed the museum's fiscal 
performance, and there was a desire to see stricter budget management and 
resolve revenue challenges.  There is a maximum capacity at the museum of 
500, but social distancing has impacted revenue by not letting people in or 
making them wait in line while annual members may reserve time slots and 
then not show up without penalty.  The Finance Committee suggested 
looking at a fee for missed reservations.  There is a need to get accurate 
budget information around the operations to know how long the museum will 
be 
subsidized. 
 
The 
Council 
needs 
updated 
attendance 
data, 
recommendations on an improved ticketing and reservation system, and 
perhaps a change in ticket prices.  He thought the fundamental issue was 
proceeding with the original expense plan without regard to falling behind on 
the revenue plan.  Passing this on consent at the same time as asking 
taxpayers to provide more funding without having this public discussion 
raised concerns.  He stated he would support the motion tonight. 
Mayor Burt questioned if the $1.688M the City is spending for exhibits 
includes other exhibits.   
Ms. O'Kane stated that was correct.   
Mayor Burt concurred that there was a real concern about a path toward a 
sustainable budget for the JMZ.  He believed exceptional community 
resources like this were not well enough known and that it was necessary to 
get more innovative on getting the word out.  He thanked the Finance 
Committee for beginning the process of delving into these issues and asked 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
if the operations plan would it be ready to fold into the budget discussions in 
May.   
Ms. O'Kane stated that would be the ideal scenario.  Staff is looking into 
possible partnerships with universities that do nonprofit consulting.  Getting 
that right group or person on board to assist is the goal.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
10. 
PUBLIC HEARING/LEGISLATIVE: Adoption of Amendments to Palo Alto 
Municipal Code Chapter 18.09, Accessory and Junior Accessory 
Dwelling Units due to State Law Changes and Direction from the 
California Department of Housing and Community Development.  
Environmental Assessment: Exempt from the Provisions of the 
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Pursuant to Public 
Resources Code Section 21080.17 and CEQA Guidelines Sections 
15061(b)(3), 15301, 15302, and 15305.  Planning and Transportation 
Commission Recommended Approval of the Ordinance.  
Garret Sauls, Planner, presented the item related to updates to the City's 
ADU ordinance related to state law changes under SB 897 and AB 2221.  
Staff had received a letter from HCD last year on December 23 outlining 12 
items in the City's code that HCD felt conflicted with state law.  Staff met 
with HCD staff on February 3 and provided a written response the following 
day outlining a number of items Staff would be able to make corrections for 
as well as a number of items Staff wanted additional clarification on.  Staff is 
waiting to hear back from HCD on these items.  In the event HCD provides a 
response, Staff will be able to return back to Council to discuss necessary 
changes.  City Staff met with the PTC on July 13, August 10, and September 
28 to discuss changes to the City's local regulations for ADUs to incentivize 
additional housing and to discuss these new state law changes.  There were 
also additional clerical corrections in the draft ordinance to adjust language 
to reflect the current regulatory framework for accessory dwelling units.   
Mr. Sauls reviewed the state law changes.  SB 897 provides an additional 18 
feet of height for a detached ADU on a lot with a single- or multifamily 
dwelling unit that is ½-mile walking distance from a major transit stop or 
high-quality transit corridor and additional 2 feet in height to accommodate 
a roof pitch aligning with the primary dwelling; an additional 18 feet of 
height for a detached ADU on a parcel with a multifamily, multistory 
dwelling; and a 25-foot tall (or lower underlying zone district height) ADU 
attached to the primary home, not exceeding 2 stories in height.  He 
discussed the ½-mile buffer distance from transit stops and showed a map  
of where the new regulations would be able to take effect.  AB 2221 states 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
an ADU may be located within a detached garage for the primary dwelling, 
and if an application for an ADU is denied, the agency must notify the 
applicant what is defective and how it can be remedied.  The bill also 
prohibits enforcement of front setbacks when there is preclusion of at least 
an 800-square foot ADU with a 4-foot side or rear setback and 16 feet in 
height.  Staff recommended approval of the draft ordinance, which includes 
the new state law provisions.   
Council Member DuBois questioned a JADU without a bathroom, with a 
separate entrance and a connection to the house, asking what else qualifies 
it as a JADU.   
Mr. Sauls stated the minimum requirement for a JADU is a kitchen with 
minimum 1 burner installed or an installed range or oven, and a bathroom.  
JADUs can share space with the primary home, in particular the bathroom.  
There is also a deed restriction required to be recorded against the property 
for owner occupancy.   
Council Member DuBois asked if this says a bathroom is not required. 
Mr. Sauls stated these changes would not enact that.  In a future ordinance 
for local changes, Staff will try to incorporate some clarification as to where 
the bathroom appears within these units, either creating a proximal distance 
or placement on the same floor level.   
Council Member DuBois stated it seems impractical to have a separate unit 
without a bathroom.  He asked how the San Antonio Station ½ mile 
interacted with the Green Meadow Historic District, whether the additional 
height was allowed or there were historic considerations.   
Mr. Sauls stated there was no consideration for detached ADUs there.  State 
law allowed an 18-foot tall structure.  There was a limiting factor for 
attached ADUs of 25 feet tall or lower based on the underlying conditions for 
the property.  For example, in a district with a height limitation of 17 feet, 
that limit would apply for an attached ADU rather than the 25 feet the state 
provides.   
Council Member DuBois appreciated the approach to pass the clarified areas 
now and hold off on the other items until there is further clarification.  He 
supported the proposed motion.   
Council Member Stone stated he understood the logic of increasing the 
height of ADUs to 18 feet on lots with existing multistory housing to keep 
height consistent with surrounding buildings but questioned the nexus of an 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
ADU being within ½ mile of a major transit stop and having a height of 18 
feet.   
Mr. Sauls stated that in theory, properties within ½ mile of high-quality 
transit have more density or higher-built structures to capitalize and utilize 
that infrastructure to incentivize different modes of transit.   
Council Member Stone asked if there were any bills the State has considered 
to encourage ADUs be used for actual housing purposes.   
Mr. Sauls stated Staff is looking at a survey in the future to get a general 
sense of how these units are used.  There was a study by the Turner Center 
showing a split of how units are being used, broken down between rental 
income, personal use, and family use, but the sample size was less than 
1,000 responses. 
Jon Lait, Planning and Transportation Director, stated Staff does not have a 
survey now but envisions future requirements, either by the State or locally.  
He stated Palo Alto might want to do its own survey to get a sense for how 
ADUs are being used.  Even if they were all being used as home offices or 
gyms, it would not negate the fact that the State is setting forth that 
mandate for ADUs.  He stated the Council was going to have a discussion 
about short-term rentals later, and there was obviously a relationship there.   
Council Member Stone stated it would be relevant to the rental registry and 
he would support getting that data.  He felt it should be looked into more to 
see what type of policies the City can push to advocate for ADUs being used 
primarily for housing purposes.   
Vice Mayor Kou asked if the regulation regarding building on the front 
setback was limited to the high-quality transit area. 
Mr. Sauls stated it would apply anywhere.  It was a catchall section of the 
state law that says the City cannot apply incumbrances for an 800-square 
foot ADU at a 4-foot setback at 16 feet in height.  Front setbacks, which 
were not explicitly outlined in the state law before, were now added.  This 
may be the State's approach to try to make units happen and provide 
homeowners an opportunity to do this.   
Vice Mayor Kou was concerned about the use of front setbacks tightening 
space available for public improvement.  Building with some of the current 
side setbacks at 4 feet would have impact on garbage bins on the side.  She 
asked what happens to an ADU or JADU built to 18 feet if a high-transit area 
is no longer high-transit.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
Mr. Sauls stated it would be considered a nonconforming condition for the 
site, and in the event of redevelopment, whether that nonconforming 
condition would be replaced would be evaluated.  In the future if high-
quality transit corridors disappear in a jurisdiction, whatever was approved 
or built would not be diminished or reduced.   
Vice Mayor Kou asked how high-quality transit corridors were determined.  
Mr. Sauls stated it was determined from 15-minute intervals of bus or other 
rapid transit movement within a space.   
Vice Mayor Kou presented a slide showing that during peak commute hours, 
it was at 16- to 18-minute intervals.  She felt it was prudent to have an 
analysis to determine if this area falls within the definition of a high-quality 
transit corridor.   
Director Lait stated that Staff is currently looking at this as part of AB 2097, 
which exempts parking within a ½-mile radius of intersecting bus lines.  He 
noted the ordinance in front of the Council was also about transit corridors, 
which was different than AB 2097.   
Mayor Burt asked when Staff provided detailed responses to the HCD letter.   
Mr. Sauls stated there was a meeting with HCD on February 3 and the 
written response was provided the following day, February 4.  Staff has 
reached out a couple of times, but there has been turnover at HCD and Staff 
has been waiting to hear back.  He was not aware if other jurisdictions had 
similar issues getting response from HCD staff.   
Mayor Burt asked whether the requirement to allow an ADU in a front yard 
with no setback only applies if the ADU cannot be reasonably located 
elsewhere on the property.   
Mr. Sauls believed it was a last resort situation due to the organization or 
layout of the property where there is limited ability to build anything in the 
back. 
Mayor Burt clarified that Staff's understanding is that a front yard ADU with 
no setback does not have to be allowed unless it cannot be fit in the back 
yard.   
Director Lait stated the State is trying to minimize the number of barriers for 
800-square foot ADUs and there may be further clarification in the next 
legislative cycle on this particular point, but that this is the current 
understanding by Staff and the City Attorney's office.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
Public Comments:  
John Kelley stated that the State has established a series of minimal 
requirements.  He referred to past amendments to Government Code 
Section 65852.2, in particular to subsection B1.  He recalled that Director 
Lait advocated that the Council not restrict the liberalization of the garage 
requirements to units within ½-mile walking distance of public transit.  He 
encouraged the Council to abide by that wisdom in this case as well.  People 
will be confused if there are different standards for different parts of the 
community.  He felt that, in an era when the Council is investing in a 
crosstown shuttle and many forms of multimodal transportation are coming 
online, it did not make sense that the only standard should be whether one 
can walk within ½ mile to a major transit stop or to a High-Speed Rail 
corridor.  People can run, ride their bicycles, take electric scooters or other 
things to transit.  Transit is becoming accessible to everyone.  He felt the 
proposed ordinance would encourage continued disparities between larger 
and smaller houses in Palo Alto and would not result in greater production of 
ADUs for rental.  He stated HCD was able to provide technical assistance in 
advance and encouraged talking with them rather than relying on Staff 
interpretation of the front setback language.   
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack  moved, seconded by Mayor Burt, to 
adopt the draft Ordinance amending Palo Alto Municipal Code Title 18 
(Zoning) regulations for Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) and Junior 
Accessory Dwelling Units (JADUs) to reflect changes in state law and 
direction from the California Department of Housing and Community 
Development (HCD). 
Council Member Cormack appreciated the public comment but did not feel it 
was productive to make those motions at this time.  She hoped there would 
be a learning mindset as mistakes were inevitable as this was improved and 
refined.  She hoped there would be more consideration toward equity going 
forward.   
Mayor Burt added that there were a combination of changes and there will 
be a learning process before expanding this further.  He thought the 
adoption of ADUs and JADUs had accelerated over the last couple years.  He 
felt there was not a strong enough case for the economics of junior ADUs 
being far lower cost than ADUs in most circumstances and therefore 
advantageous to homeowners who may not want to go through the high 
expense of a detached senior ADU.   
MOTION PASSED 7-0 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
11. 
Approval of Response to the Grand Jury Report "If You Only Read the 
Ballot, You're Being Duped"  
Molly Stump, City Attorney, stated the draft proposed response to the Grand 
Jury was included in the Council's packet.  She added that her office has 
coordinated with other cities who were asked to respond similarly to the 
Grand Jury report and believed that, while responses were unique to each 
city, what was proposed for Palo Alto's response was in alignment with other 
jurisdictions.   
Council Member Cormack commented that the Grand Jury's interest in this 
topic was understandable and agreed with the wording used in the response.  
She encouraged everyone to read the whole text.   
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Burt, to 
approve the proposed response to the Santa Clara County Civil Grand Jury 
Report entitled, “If You Only Read the Ballot, You’re Being Duped,” dated 
October 7, 2022. 
Mayor Burt thought the grand jury report itself was misleading in title 
because in the case of the ballot measure, Palo Alto was one of a number 
with similar language that is very common.  He did not find the language in 
the ballot measure or in the subsequent explanations of the ballot measure 
ambiguous and felt the Grand Jury overstepped in their characterizations.  
He noted that he was not in favor of the language Valley Water used to 
extend their term limits but that it was the same language as the County 
Board of Supervisors had used a few years before without much criticism.   
Vice Mayor Kou stated she supported the motion and added that it was not 
wise to reduce local control by shifting authority to a government entity that 
is not accountable to Palo Alto residents.  She thought there was some 
misunderstanding or misperception by the Grand Jury of how the ballots 
were written.   
Council Member Tanaka disagreed with his colleagues and felt the Grand 
Jury was spot on.  He stated one of the ballot measures implies that 911 
service would be lost, which clearly was not true.  Whether it had passed or 
not, 911 would have gone away.  He felt there were other things included 
that were exaggeration and stated ballot measures should be presented with 
more straightforward facts.   
Council Member Filseth asked if the Grand Jury contacted Palo Alto's legal 
department to ask for input on this.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
City Attorney Stump stated they did not but that the Grand Jury would 
typically get legal guidance from the county counsel.  She stated often the 
various officials from jurisdictions that will be asked to respond are invited to 
speak with the Grand Jury and provide testimony but did not believe that 
had occurred in this case.   
Council Member DuBois thought people who were very passionate about 
issues tended to apply for the Grand Jury and urged people to consider 
participating in the process.  He stated he would support the motion.   
Council Member Stone supported the motion.  He agreed that this topic was 
a very important one but disagreed that the phrasing was ambiguous.  He 
thought it was clear the measure created a tax to be collected in perpetuity 
until voters make the decision to end it and that logic would dictate they 
would end it the same way they initiated it, with a vote by the people.  He 
concurred with Staff's denial to submit ballot language to County counsel 
beforehand as this Council has expressed the City's interest in maintaining 
local control rather than allowing the state or county to take it.  He 
appreciated the work the Grand Jury has done and agreed that people 
should get involved but felt their recommendations were unnecessary in this 
case.   
Council Member Tanaka stated Measure K said the funds were for public 
safety, affordable housing, rail cross safety, and homeless services and 
asked how much of the funds would really go toward that versus employee 
raises, for example.  He felt it could be read that if not passed, there would 
not be public safety.  Similarly, Measure L said it would fund 911 responses, 
but even if it was not passed, 911 would still be funded.  He stated that 
reading literally, it could be implied that not passing Measure K or Measure L 
would mean that 911 responses and public safety would not be funded, 
which is not true.   
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no 
12. 
Colleagues Memo From Council Members Dubois, Kou, And Stone 
Regarding: Whole-Home Short-Term Rentals  
Council Member Dubois described multiple individuals and companies acting 
as super-hosts with short-term rentals in Palo Alto in a well-established 
professional short-term stay industry.  People with multiple listings were 
likely to be running a business and not living on the property.  Looking at 
data of units rented recently, they were rented for an average of 144 days a 
year at $220 a night in revenue, about $30,000 in income.  Palo Alto 
prohibits short-term rentals of less than 30 days.  About 75% of the listings 
were whole-home listings.  Comparing the historic trend of rental vacancies 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
(93 units in the first half of 2022) to 500 to 1000 short-term rentals, there 
was almost an order of magnitude more short-term rentals than long-term 
rentals.  The last time Council looked at this was 7 years ago.  Many cities 
are on version 2.0 of their ordinances, so there are many examples to learn 
from, both ordinances that did not work and those that do.  New York City 
and Dallas both recently passed new short-term rental ordinances.  Berkeley 
charges a short-term rental TOT incremental tax that covers the cost of 
enforcement.   
Council Member DuBois stated any policy change the Council were to 
advance related to the need for housing will encounter opposition from a 
motivated group of people and that Council needed to determine whether it 
was the community or a small group of professionals in favor of short-term 
rentals and also how it impacted local hotels.  There was also a conflict of 
values; short-term rentals are prohibited and there is a struggle to add 
housing, yet the ban is not enforced.  The Council was asked to look at 
aligning ordinances and enforcement with values.  They were asked to refer 
a discussion to Policy and Services to look at specific recommendations on 
short-term rentals, either to enforce the current ban on short-term rentals 
and update penalties or to update the ordinance to allow owner-occupied 
short-term rentals and establish registration and enforcement requirements.  
In the short term, Policy and Services could look at including short-term 
rentals on the rental registry.  Multi-listing professionals could be required to 
register as businesses.  Vendor offerings make it much easier to enforce 
rental ordinances and would ease the resource burden for Staff.   
Vice Mayor Kou, as a real estate agent who also does property management, 
has worked on Airbnb short-term rentals and related some complaints she 
has heard from neighbors: buses offloading many people into the house, 
high noise levels, numerous cars parked on the street, loud music into the 
night.  In addition, during the sale of a property, sellers are required to 
disclose any potential nuisances, and she stated most short-term rentals are 
considered as nuisances in these disclosures.  Another thing to consider is 
that when a house is empty, it is not building community.  She felt that 
housing and stability should be provided to people who need it.   
Council Member Stone stated this recommendation addressed a lot of issues 
from quality of life to public safety but was primarily a tool to add to the 
affordable housing toolbox to provide more housing in the community.  
Looking at the impact short-term rental units have had on housing markets 
across the world, the evidence was clear that it leads to lower housing 
supply and higher housing prices.  He quoted several articles with examples 
and stated there was a clear display that short-term rentals negatively 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
impact housing supply and increase housing prices.  This memo helped 
address some of that and supported affordable housing goals.   
Public Comments:  
Jane Stone, Palo Alto resident for more than 50 years, was opposed to 
short-term rentals and had direct experience with it in her condo complex.  
She stated it has been detrimental to the complex's sense of community and 
that it was disconcerting having strangers living next door in quick 
succession.  She believed it was also detrimental to the City.  The unit in 
question in her complex is leased from an owner who lives in another state 
and operates as a vacation rental with a provision for not less than 30 days, 
but it is often 30 days and rarely more than a few months.  When a problem 
occurs, it is more work for the Volunteer Board of Directors, of which Ms. 
Stone is the president.  She gave an example of the irrigation system in the 
tenant's backyard leaking with the owner unable to be reached, as well as 
problems with noise and stacks of garbage being left for weeks in the 
carport.  People here temporarily from out of state do not know about the 
drought and are not motivated to conserve water.  She urged the Council 
not to allow this.   
Winter Dellenbach was happy there would be further discussion on this and 
thought Airbnbs needed to tighten up regulations.  She stated she recently 
became conscious of the number of uninhabited homes and wanted to see 
this issue balanced more in favor of the community rather than the private 
interests.   
Council Member Cormack asked Staff what happens if someone is concerned 
about an Airbnb, whether there is a number they can call or if code 
enforcement works on this.   
Jon Lait, Planning and Transportation Director, stated they would call Code 
Enforcement who would go out, send a notice, and try to obtain voluntary 
compliance.  It is hard to follow-up on an Airbnb and change that behavior 
unless there are other calls within a certain period of time. 
Council Member Cormack was surprised to read this Colleagues Memo.  She 
stated she has heard anecdotes but this had not come up as an issue on the 
National Community Survey and she has only had 1 email on this topic in 
the past 4 years.  The Council received a persuasive email from someone in 
College Terrace indicating that prohibiting these things would not likely 
create housing, which is the statement in the memo.  There are families who 
need to be here for a short period of time to be at the hospital and need an 
extra room for their kids, a kitchen, and the ability to do laundry.  There are 
residents who spend a few months out of the year elsewhere visiting family 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
or for other reasons.  Removing this option will limit the people who live 
here and who have a legitimate need to come here.  She did not feel this 
was a priority for Council and was concerned about how much time it would 
take for Staff.  From a process standpoint, she found this concerning as it 
was late in the calendar year and in the legislative session for a nonurgent 
problem.  She was also concerned about overly detailed recommendations to 
Policy and Services.  She would have been open to something narrower 
addressing bad actors. 
Mayor Burt stated good local data has not been accumulated but that studies 
accumulating in recent years seem to confirm a lot of anecdotal experience 
that has been cited.  He did not want to be overly restrictive and thought 
there were ways to balance these needs, such as allowing rentals when 
there is an owner occupant and having a monthly rental exemption.  He 
thought it was important not to undermine the local hotel industry.  He did 
not want to be overly prescriptive in what to direct the Policy and Services 
Committee to do but thought the general guidelines of the referral were 
appropriate.  He felt not allowing short-term rentals legally but turning a 
blind eye and accepting their Transient Occupancy Tax was wrong.   
Council Member Tanaka stated he has had just as many complaints about 
Airbnbs as bad neighbors in general.  He did not know if this was a good 
neighbor issue or an Airbnb issue and gave some anecdotal evidence of 
issues with both Airbnbs and rentals.  He also gave an example of someone 
willing to do an Airbnb because their child will only be home for the summer 
but not wanting to do a simple long-term rental.  He wondered if, by making 
it very difficult to do short-term rentals, some people who can afford it 
would simply chose not to rent space out and housing stock would actually 
be lost.  If it was too hard or inflexible for landlords, some landlords may not 
bother and there would be less housing in the City.  He stated College 
Terrace, located near Stanford University and the research park, was a site 
of a lot of short-term housing because a lot of people come to Stanford for a 
few months at a time.  Having long-term leases and getting rid of Airbnbs 
might make housing more difficult for those people.  He believed Palo Alto's 
demographics were different than other cities that are more vacation resorts 
and felt the crux of the issue was people not being good neighbors, which 
had nothing to do with Airbnb and needed to be addressed. 
Council Member Filseth stated the feedback seemed to have 2 distinct 
buckets: the question of whether short-term rentals had an adverse impact 
on housing affordability in Palo Alto and whether some of these were a 
public nuisance to their neighborhoods.  Before sending this to Policy and 
Services, the Council should be clear about which of those, or both, they 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
want looked at.  There was also an existing ordinance with not a lot of 
compliance. 
MOTION:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Stone, that Council refer discussion to Policy and Services to evaluate 
specific recommendations regarding Short-Term Rentals (STR) including: 
1) 
Recommend an Option:  
a) Enforce current ban on STR and update penalties 
OR 
b) Update ordinance to allow owner occupied STR and establish 
registration and enforcement requirements 
2) With consideration of the following: 
a) Consider including STR in current rental registry efforts 
b) For multi-listing professional hosts, consider requiring business 
registration in updated business registry process  
c) Evaluate means of enforcement and opportunities to minimize 
costs by considering technology opportunities (automated 
capture, address determination, enforcement letters, etc.) 
d) Determine if we can get RHNA credit for more long-term 
housing 
e) Ordinance update if needed 
f) Implement enforcement as required 
Council Member DuBois clarified that the memo was not advocating any 
particular vendors for data services.  Some of these vendor offerings use 
data to streamline enforcement, generate enforcement letters, and attach 
supporting data.  It would be managed by Staff but would automate a lot of 
the code enforcement work.  The motion was to have the new Council 
consider the issue and the options.  Rentals under 30 days were not allowed, 
so it was important to clean this up; it was not right to try to have it both 
ways.  He stated this was a high-demand area, but the hotels were still 
recovering, with room rates still way down.  He hoped the other council 
members would support P&S doing the detailed work and coming back to 
Council next year with recommendations.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
Council Member Stone stated this item would push the issue to Policy and 
Services to dive into these policy questions and open it up more for 
community discussion at that point.  He stated that he did quite a bit of 
research on this and was not able to find studies that support short-term 
rentals being good for housing stock and affordable housing.   
Vice Mayor Kou agreed that there is no good local data.  Code Enforcement 
cannot get everywhere, and it would be important to look into this more, 
monitoring and having inspections to make sure the short-term rentals have 
a high level of usability, regulating the rental host and ensuring their 
compliance, looking at how long guests are booked for before they arrive.  
In terms of registration and compliance, there was also collection of funds 
and coming up with a way to ensure the ability to address adverse impacts 
in the neighborhoods.  This motion would refer the issue to Policy and 
Services for a discussion and to have them come back with some discussion 
points and recommendations.  With the State forcing cities to build housing, 
housing stock needs to be utilized in a meaningful way.   
There was discussion on the wording of the motion.   
Council Member Cormack was concerned about this motion, specifically 
directing Policy and Services to choose between the 2 options.  She believed 
there were bad actors and that should be addressed but did not want to give 
this level of detail to Policy and Services because Staff has things to work on 
that would make a bigger impact.   
There was further clarification on the wording of the motion.   
Council Member Tanaka asked how Staff envisions enforcing this.   
Ed Shikada, City Manager, stated it depends on the overall framework that is 
ultimately recommended and how difficult it would be to enforce.  It could 
range from a simple prohibition to a more of a regulatory scheme, each of 
which requires differing levels of active enforcement.  It was currently a 
prohibition and, as such, handled as a Code Enforcement matter when 
specific addresses were reported.   
Council Member Tanaka asked if that has actually happened.   
City Manager Shikada stated it took great time and suspected not all of the 
reports were captured in a time frame with which the calling party would 
like.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
Director Lait stated Staff responds to every complaint but code enforcement 
is complaint driven and there are people who will continue to offer their 
residence through one of these vacation rentals. 
Council Member Tanaka asked how many complaints there have been this 
year.   
Director Lait would get that number for the Council but did not have it 
available.  
Council Member Tanaka stated the problem this was trying to solve was to 
prevent bad neighbors.  He stated it was not just a short-term rental 
problem but more of a general problem.  People want to live next to good 
neighbors, and this does not address that.   
Council Member DuBois stated there was not one solution but there was a 
difference between somebody living there long term versus coming for a 
couple of nights.  This may not solve a bad neighbor issue, but he felt the 
primary issue was the impact on housing.   
There was more discussion about the wording of the motion.   
MOTION PASSED: 5-2, Tanaka, Cormack no 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Vice Mayor Kou stated that last week the VTA Group 2 North County had 
elections for the VTA Board of Directors representatives.  Mayor Burt was 
elected unanimously to be board representative, and Los Altos Council 
Member Lynette Lee Eng was elected to be the alternate, also unanimously.   
Council Member Stone stated he and School Board Member Elect Shana 
Segal got to tour the Paly Robotics Lab and meet the students last weekend.  
The students put on a presentation about the successes they have had over 
the last year in competitions.  In particular, they have been working with 
AbilityPath to create a piece of technology that uses various kinds of GPS 
tracking and other technology to allow a person with limited sight or who is 
blind to be able to walk, giving them signals when an object is coming.  He 
highly encouraged anyone in the community to check out what the Paly 
Robotics team is doing and felt what they were doing for the local 
community and nonprofits was something to be proud of.   
Mayor Burt stated that Thursday morning was the ribbon cutting of the 
Wilton Court Affordable Housing Project and it was great to see it come 
about and to meet some of the residents.  Saturday evening was the annual 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 21 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/12/2022 
Buena Vista Posada, which was a fine event, and there is an upcoming 
Buena Vista study session with the Housing Authority soon after the new 
year.  Lastly, the committee advisory group on the future Searsville 
Reservoir was reconvened.  It looked like it would be many years before this 
project was complete, but it was moving forward.  This project will address 
the blockage of Searsville Dam, gradually flushing out 100 years plus of 
accumulated sediment, and will enable fisheries' migration upstream.  
Tremendous environmental analysis and regulatory approvals need to be 
made before the construction process can begin.   
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 9:08 P.M. 
 
