CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 10 
 Special Meeting 
 
June 1, 2022 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:30 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Filseth, Stone, Tanaka 
Present Remotely: 
Cormack, Kou 
Absent: 
 
 
DuBois 
 
Public Comment  
 
1. 
Lynn Krug requested Juneteenth become a City paid holiday and that 
it become a Monday holiday when it falls on a weekend. 
2. 
Sara Temple requested the City of Palo Alto honor Juneteenth as a 
paid City holiday and when it falls on a weekend, make it a paid 
Monday holiday. 
3. 
Matt Schlegel implored the Council to help residents electrify their 
homes and decrease fossil fuel consumption. 
4. 
Aram James said the City Manager should be defunded and the 
matter of encryption and first amendment rights should be brought 
back to the Council. He called for an opening hiring process of the 
next police chief. 
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor Patrick Burt called for a Moment of Silence for the victims of the 
Uvalde, TX, shooting as well as for the victims and families of other incidents 
in the country. 
 
Action Items 
1. Review and Approval of 2022-2023 Work Plans for the following Boards 
and Commissions: Parks and Recreation Commission, Planning and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 10 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2022 
Transportation Commission, Historic Resources Board, Architectural 
Review Board and Human Relations Commission        
Assistant Director of Community Services Daren Anderson introduced the 
topic of the Parks and Recreation Commission (PRC) work plan.  
Parks and Recreation Commission Chair Jeff Greenfield said the PRC 
priorities for the year were maximizing recreation opportunities using 
available resources; equity access and inclusion for programs, parks, and 
open space; and environmental sustainability and climate change. There are 
7 priority workplan projects. They are looking to bring tennis and pickleball 
court usage policy update recommendations to City Council. There is a new 
usage policy review and recommendation for e-powered powered bicycles 
and other mobility devices in parks and open spaces. Work is being done to 
identify and recommend sites for park dedication, a city gym and wellness 
center, a skate park, a First Tee partnership at the gold course, and the 10.5 
acres at the Baylands. 
The PRC is looking to better publicize ways for the community to help 
support Community Services Department (CDS) programs and projects. The 
PRC now serves as a community forum for recommendations on urban 
forestry matters. One ad hoc not associated with a committee will refresh 
the PRC webpage. Chair Greenfield stated Cubberley could become a top 
priority for the PRC. 
Council Member Greer Stone asked if the intention was to expand the 
number of pickleball courts. Chair Greenfield said this will be considered 
while incorporating the needs of the tennis community. 
Council Member Stone asked if the current policy bans electric bikes and 
other mobility devices from parks and open spaces. Assistant Director 
Anderson said one outdated regulation prohibiting electric vehicles except for 
handicap use for trails, parks, and open space needs to be updated. 
Council Member Alison Cormack said an app showing the availability of 
tennis courts in the City would be useful. 
Vice Mayor Lydia Kou said a balance should be kept between pickleball and 
tennis courts. Vacant lands should be preserved to accommodate 
recreational use for the growing community. The potential park sites sent via 
email should be added to goal #6. Regulations regarding e-bikes should be 
enforced with penalties to ensure safety on shared pathways. Vice Mayor 
Kou encouraged work to continue on the former Measure E site. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 10 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2022 
Mayor Burt asked for all Council members to have their cameras on when 
attending meetings remotely. 
Council Member Eric Filseth encouraged the PRC to spend time thinking 
about the long-term strategy for expanding the City’s stock of park land. 
Mayor Burt expressed concern over the shaping of trees. Chair Greenfield 
said guidelines for street tree pruning are included in the tree technical 
manual and can be updated. The tree and landscape technical manual will be 
undergoing a major revision associated with the proposed tree ordinance 
change. 
Council Member Greg Tanaka asked how the skate park was coming along. 
Chair Greenfield said an ad hoc is working on the project. Assistant Director 
Anderson said a community meeting will be held on June 15 at 6:30 p.m. 
that will guide further discussion and Council action. 
Mayor Burt moved the discussion toward the Planning and Transportation 
Commission (PTC). 
Planning and Transportation Commission Chair Ed Lauing said the PTC 
mission now includes robust community engagement and a forum for public 
comment. The PTC would like to initiate a traffic study session to discuss and 
hear public comment on high-concern or high-collision areas. The PTC would 
like to propose the creation of a structured framework for planning of future 
Palo Alto neighborhoods. 
Mayor Burt asked how the Cal Ave. parking program, the Cal Ave. in-lieu 
parking program, and the downtown in-lieu parking program could be 
knitted together. Chair Lauing said many of the projects are already 
underway. Council can give feedback as to priorities. 
Council Member Stone asked when the economic development manager and 
consultant would be brought on board. City Manager Ed Shikada said 
recruitment has closed and the candidates are being reviewed. 
Council Member Stone asked when the CUP threshold project would be 
discussed by the PTC. Chair Lauing said that was referred back to Council to 
be continued for more study. 
Council Member Stone asked if grant funding for the on-demand shuttle 
program would fully fund the program. Assistant Director of Planning and 
Development Services Rachael Tanner said the program was fully funded and 
the RP is out for consideration. Council Member Stone asked if there was an 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 10 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2022 
operational time line. Assistant Director Tanner said she would reach out for 
an answer. 
Council Member Filseth asked if parking standards for the City would be 
looked at in terms of demand given types of housing and tenants. Chair 
Lauing said the plan is to generate a lot of data but there has been no data 
in the last 2 years. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked for the PTC to consider collisions between cyclists and 
pedestrians especially when it pertains to electric mobility devices.  
Mayor Burt moved the discussion to the Historic Resources Board (HRB). 
Historic Resources Board Chair Caroline Willis said updating the inventory is 
important to the HRB as it has not been updated since 1978. Chair Willis 
would like to see the water tower building and the pumping station on Palo 
Alto Avenue on the inventory list. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked how the HRB would be communicating with identified 
property owners. Chair Willis said that process has not yet been identified. A 
consultant could organize community meetings and get feedback in finding 
out where they may hit roadblocks. Assistant Director Rachael Tanner said 
they are looking to engage a consultant with project management expertise 
as well as historic expertise. 
Chair Willis said there were benefits to being on the historical registry rather 
than negatives. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if commissioners would be engaging with homeowners 
or if it would be staff or consultant-led engagement. Chair Willis said HRB 
members are hoping to be engaged. Outreach has not been defined and 
consultants will guide the approach. 
Mayor Burt introduced discussion by the Architectural Review Board (ARB). 
Manager of Current Planning Jodie Gerhardt introduced Architectural Review 
Board Chair Osma Thompson. Chair Thompson said the ARB will be 
reviewing projects with priorities are on housing. The ARB will discuss 
comprehensive plan goals, policies, programs, and design guidelines.  Two 
ad hoc committees, for Cal Ave. and the parklets, have been created, and 
she added that the South El Camino design guidelines are quite old. The ARB 
will finalize the objective standards while keeping a pulse on how the 
objective standards are faring when it comes to the struggles of applicants. 
Regarding the ARB award ceremony, winners have been selected but the 
ceremony date has not been established. ARB bylaws will be discussed and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 10 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2022 
updated as needed and will include discussion process and conforming with 
the Council’s handbook. 
Mayor Burt asked about the timing on the temporary structures and the role 
of the ARB in the Cal Ave. design process. Chair Thompson said the ad hoc 
committees would be able to expedite updates to and seek feedback from 
the Council. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked how many ARB commissioners must be Palo Alto 
residents. Manager Gerhardt said there was no residency requirement. There 
is a requirement for some of the members to be architects. 
Mayor Burt introduced the Human Relations Commission (HRC). 
Manager of Human Services Minka van der Zwaag introduced Human 
Relations Commission Vice Chair Adriana Eberle. The HRC work plan 
continues the accomplishments made the previous year focusing on priorities 
within the City. Priorities include public safety. A town hall meeting was held 
where the public could voice qualities they look for in a new police chief and 
which issues were important to them which included public hate crimes. The 
HRC plans to implement avenues to decrease hate crimes and hate-based 
incidents in the City by having organizations educate the public on what 
constitutes a hate crime and how best to combat it. The HRC will be working 
with the City commissions as to the best way to include and consider equity 
in the commissions. Public health is another priority. The HRC would like to 
form a partnership with mental health providers, public health, and business 
associations to get their feedback and respond to any issues that may arise. 
HRC will provide feedback to City Council on housing and homelessness 
regarding current rental protection ordinances. Core responsibilities of the 
HRC include ad hoc committees reviewing and giving input to finding 
decisions on HSRAP, CDBG, and emerging need funds. HRC’s final priority is 
climate change. HRC will be losing a member and recruitment will find a new 
5th commissioner in the fall. The HRC asked for more commissioners and 
guidance on how to prioritize the work plan. 
Council Member Stone asked if the discussion at the town hall meeting 
regarding the new police chief was useful. Vice Chair Eberle said 
transparency was a main concern and Commissioners brought a lot of 
insight. Commissioner perspectives were incorporated into the recruitment 
advertising for police chief.  
Council Member Stone asked if future rental protection ordinances would be 
considered along with current ones. Vice Chair Eberle said there are other 
protections the City may want to consider in the future. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 10 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2022 
Council Member Stone noted the disproportionate impact of climate change 
on communities of color and low-income communities and wondered what 
the impact would be in Palo Alto. Vice Chair Eberle stated the commissioner 
spearheading this project is stepping down and it will have to be 
reevaluated. 
Council Member Cormack said the member size of the HRC was decided on 
mainly due to a lack of applicants. She urged there to be a focus on inclusion 
and belonging in regard to hate crimes. 
Mayor Burt said there were areas of the S/CAP that overlap in the climate 
arena with the HRC’s efforts on equity. 
Vice Mayor Kou emphasized recognizing Juneteenth. 
 
The Council took a break at 7:31 PM and reconvened the meeting at 7:41 
pm.  
 
2. PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of Two Ordinances Implementing the 
Objective 
Standards 
Project, 
Including: 
1) 
New 
Chapter 
18.24, 
Contextual 
Design 
Criteria 
and 
Objective 
Design 
Standards; 
2) 
Modifications to Affordable Housing (AH) Overlay District to Eliminate the 
Legislative Process; 3) Changes to Remove Inconsistencies and 
Redundancies, and Streamline Project Review Throughout Title 18.   
Assistant Director Tanner introduced Consultant Jean Eisberg who presented 
the project overview. The existing subjective design criteria was transformed 
from context-based design criteria into objective standards. Updates to Title 
18 help to identify the City’s design priorities and clarify those as objective 
regulations. Work with the ARB has helped refine and add objective design 
standards. Webinars with the community helped to understand concerns. 
Design standards apply only to multifamily projects or mixed-use projects 
with at least 2/3 residential and only to districts that allow multifamily 
housing. 
Existing criteria was compared to the new proposed objective standards. 
Gaps were identified including a lack of privacy criteria. Privacy standards 
include windows being made opaque and located away from potential 
privacy impacts for existing residents and balconies designed to not look 
down onto existing private open spaces. Standards would apply when a new 
project is proposed close to an existing residential project. Applicants would 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 10 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2022 
be encouraged to establish a deeper setback. These standards would not 
apply to other commercial projects or non-housing development projects. 
The menu of options regarding façade composition was expanded. 
Contextual height transitions reduce apparent mass. Daylight planes would 
be required to new developments near residential housing in commercial 
districts. Other updates to Title 18 include a new streamlined review process 
for housing development projects only meeting objective standards. Instead 
of the architectural review process, they would go through one study session 
with the ARB. The staff report for that session would rely more on the 
objective standards checklist rather than subjective findings. 
The affordable housing overlay allows more flexible development standards 
for 100-percent affordable projects. Applicants were not taking advantage of 
this opportunity due to the onerous legislative process. The proposed 
process would allow projects that meet affordability criteria to automatically 
qualify for flexible design standards. 
Housing development projects would be required to meet all typical zoning 
standards as well as the new design criteria and objective design standards. 
They would undergo CEQA review as applicable and streamlined review 
through one ARB study session. Other projects, including commercial and 
discretionary housing projects, would also need to meet zoning regulations 
for development envelope and go through context-based design criteria, 
CEQA review, and the standard architectural review. In the Staff alternative 
approach, all projects would go through the new design criteria and 
objective standards in order to streamline the review and clarify the City’s 
design priorities for all applicants. New design standards would apply to all 
projects regardless of configuration of use or split of residential and 
commercial. 
Public Comment 
1. 
Jeff Levinsky encouraged the Council to stick to their previous 
direction to staff regarding objective design standards. The rule 
prohibiting long-term surface parking in front of buildings is an 
enormous change from the existing law prohibiting open parking 
which applies only to RM-40 projects with 6 or more units. The 
wording in the new standards is far from objective and should be 
fixed. Standards are unclear where it tries to define different types of 
housing. Abutting and adjacent are not used correctly.  
Ms. Eisberg stated there is not expected to be a lot of surface parking with 
redevelopment. They do not want to see any surface parking between the 
front lot line and the building. Regarding public comment referencing packet 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 10 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2022 
page 116 regarding parking, those are existing regulations with old language 
that were relocated. In response to the comment about packet page 66 
regarding privacy spacing, the standards are proposed to apply to new 
projects with a facing window or balcony that is within 30 feet of the 
abutting facing window or balcony. Privacy standards do not apply to 
buildings over 30 feet apart. Abutting properties have a shared lot line. 
Mayor Burt asked if subjective language is allowed if it is carryover 
language. Assistant City Attorney Albert Yang said the section cited on 
packet page 116 is applicable to all development in the City including 
commercial projects where the subjective standards could be applied more 
freely. Subjective elements may not be able to apply to housing 
development projects but there are additional objective standards for those 
types of projects. New housing development projects should go to Chapter 
18.24. There are new objective design standards that apply to housing 
development projects. A specific set of regulations apply to projects where 
subjective criteria cannot be used to deny or reduce project density. 
Council Member Cormack referenced packet page 40 and said it was 
draconian to limit a façade to 15-percent windows. Chair Thompson said for 
buildings within 30 feet of each other, there were options to offset windows, 
angle glazing away from an abutting structure, or reduce glazing. Reducing 
glazing is not advisable by any architect. It does not work for multifamily 
housing, and it is unlikely a developer would do that. 
Council Member Stone asked if the subjective privacy guidelines were more 
restrictive than what is being proposed. Ms. Eisberg said the existing privacy 
regulations are subjective and are at the discretion of ARB review. 
Council Member Stone asked if the 6-foot step-back proposal would be 
significant enough to provide meaningful privacy protection. Chair Thompson 
explained that was partly for privacy but also for contextualizing a building 
façade. 
Mayor Burt referenced a passage in SB 330 regarding no personal or 
subjective judgement by a public official. It is state mandated they cannot 
have standards that require any subjective judgement. Mayor Burt asked if 
the ARB would have less discretion and less ability to drive better design if 
objective standards were applied to commercial projects. Chair Thompson 
said good design and quality cannot be guaranteed with objective standards.  
Vice Mayor Kou questioned the privacy impacts of angling windows up to 30 
degrees to face away from abutting privacy impacts. Chair Thompson said 
the photographs on packet page 39 best illustrate the situation. Vice Mayor 
Kou asked if the fire department was consulted in terms of ingress and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 10 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2022 
egress through windows in case of fire. Manager Gerhardt said building 
codes would not be violated. 
Council Member Filseth voiced concerned over use of the words abutting and 
adjacent. Staff could change the language when it refers to the parcel line. 
Council Member Filseth asked if FAR could be increased to compensate for 
height limits. Manager Gerhardt said an analysis would have to be done and 
setbacks may need to be reduced. 
Council Member Filseth had questions regarding the appeal process, which 
was explained by Manager Gerhardt. Council Member Filseth had concerns 
over sun and shade impacts and Manager Gerhardt stated the daylight plane 
standards would handle those issues. Council Member Filseth asked if the 
ARB was confident that the contextual design criteria give them the tools 
needed to produce quality design for commercial projects. Chair Thompson 
stated the ARB was satisfied. 
Vice Mayor Kou was concerned over the availability of affordable housing 
projects. She stated she was unable to support modifications to the 
affordable housing overlay district to eliminate the legislative process. Vice 
Mayor Kou said they were moving too fast and there was confusion in the 
language being proposed.  
Mayor Burt said the choices were not moving forward or moving forward 
with what is proposed and then tweaking them. 
Council Member Stone asked if they were precluded under state law to make 
the standards more restrictive. Assistant City Attorney Yang says standards 
can be changed but they cannot make the overall standards more restrictive 
than they were on January 1, 2019. 
Council Member Stone asked how many 100-percent affordable housing 
projects are presented to the City each year. Staff said they do not get many 
and currently there are 2. 
Council Member Filseth referenced the affordable housing overlay and asked 
what the process was to look at traffic and parking issues if they dispense 
with PTC and Council. Staff said the project would still go to the ARB and 
concerns would be addressed. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the 2850 West Bayshore project would pass 
the suggested objective standards. Manager Gerhardt said there would have 
to be changes to it. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 10 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  06/01/2022 
Staff asked Council if they would like to maintain the existing context-based 
design criteria or go with the new criteria for commercial projects. If the 
staff proposal was accepted, they would revise the ordinance to include that. 
MOTION:  Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth to adopt 
two ordinances implementing the objective standards project, including: an 
ordinance creating Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter 18.24 (Contextual 
Design Criteria and Objective Design Standards) (Attachment A); and an 
ordinance adopting related changes throughout Title 18 (Zoning) to 
implement the new standards (Attachment B). 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if the residential mixed-use projects in Attachment A 
pertain to SB 35 and if so, do other criteria such as living wages or 
prevailing wages need to be included in the ordinance. Assistant City 
Attorney Yang said the 2/3 standard is from the Housing Accountability Act 
and is not a part of SB 35 and the additional requirements do not apply. 
MOTION PASSED/FAILED:  5-1, Cormack No, DuBois Absent 
 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
It was recommended at the May 26 Silicon Valley Regional Interoperability 
Authority Board of Directors meeting that the organization not take a 
position on Senate Bill 1000. The board directed the executive director to 
send a letter to Senator Becker’s office supporting the inclusion of cost 
recovery language in the legislation to comply with any of the new state 
mandates if SB 1000 becomes law. 
Mayor Burt is heading to the U.S. Conference of Mayors in Reno and will be 
receiving an award on one of the climate electrification initiatives. He was 
asked to participate on a panel related to electric vehicles and electrification. 
 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 9:42 P.M. 
