CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 33 
Special Meeting 
June 13, 2022 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present in person:  
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Tanaka 
Present virtually:  
None 
Absent: 
Stone 
Special Order of the Day 
1.
Proclamation Recognizing Juneteenth Holiday
Council Member DuBois read the proclamation into the record on behalf 
of the Council. 
Closed Session 
2.
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY- EXISTING LITIGATION
Subject: Miriam Green v. City of Palo Alto  Santa Clara County
Superior Court Case No. 16CV300760 (One Case, as
Defendant) 
 
Authority: 
Government 
Code 
Section
54956.9(d)(1)
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
Rebecca Eisenberg reminded the Council that the City of Palo Alto lost the 
previous case and was mandated to pay $12 million to the ratepayers. 
The Court found that the City of Palo Alto acted illegally when it 
transferred ratepayer funds from utilities over to the General Fund. She 
concluded that the City needed to stop using ratepayer’s money to fight 
against ratepayers. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council 
Member Burt to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-0-1, Stone absent 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:05 P.M. 
Page 2 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:12  P.M. 
There were no announcements from Closed Session 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
Rebecca Eisenberg indicated that Palo Alto’s government was suffering 
from a deficit in public relations.  The Human Resource Director continued 
to silence a member of the public and his requests to know the process 
for the hiring of the new Chief of Police. 
Aram James encouraged the Council to read Ms. Eisenberg’s remarks in 
the Daily Post regarding Council’s action on the Castilleja School 
Expansion Project.  He strongly urged the City Council to require that the 
three candidates for the position of Chief of Police be brought forward and 
vetted by the public.  
Linda Jolley (In person) found the idea of secrecy in government repulsive 
and that the secrecy must stop.  She made a Public Records Request for 
all information on the City’s activities as well as the Human Relations 
Commission (HRC) regarding homelessness.  Many homeless people were 
being persecuted and she shared she was denied her right to vote 
because of her address. 
Matt Schlegel thanked Mayor Burt and Council Members Cormack and 
Stone for highlighting the importance of keeping climate change at top of 
mind at a recent HRC meeting.  At the next Sustainability and Climate 
Action Plan (S/CAP) meeting he requested a restatement of the 
commitment to the City’s goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 80 
percent below the 1990 level by 2030 (80 by 30).  At the last S/CAP Ad 
Hoc Committee, he was disappointed by the lack of focus on immediate 
efforts and home electrification.  He recommended the S/CAP Ad Hoc 
Committee focus on easy and quick actions like encouraging folks to 
install electric water heaters. 
Manaal Shafi with Bloom Energy reported the company raised over 
$250,000 to benefit the Valley Medical Foundation.  On July 2, 2022 the 
second annual Stars and Stripes Community Run will be held to support 
and celebrate the City’s frontline hospital works and the patients they 
serve.  She encouraged the Council to participate in the run as well as 
professional Staff to participate in community communications. 
Page 3 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES  
Jonathan Erman (in person) felt the use of the auditorium at the Art 
Center was being constrained due to the off-stage space being converted 
to offices. 
Consent Calendar 
Council Members Cormack, Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item 
Number 5. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 4. 
PUBLIC COMMENT – CONSENT AGENDA 
Jeremy Erman was pleased to see on the Consent Calendar the extension 
of the contracts for the three groups that used the Lucie Stern Community 
Center.  He was disappointed the extension was only for 1-year and 
encouraged the City to sign a multi-year contract. 
Jonathan Erman echoed and agreed with the previous speaker’s 
comments.  All three companies brought extraordinary artists and art to 
Palo Alto and their value was immeasurable.   
Rebecca Eisenberg addressed Item Five and stated it was inaccurate to 
calculate Impact Fees based on 200-square feet per employee.  When the 
City underestimates the number of employees that work in an office.  That 
underestimates the negative impacts the employers has on the City.  
Council Member Cormack registered a no vote on Item Five. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Item Four and Item Five. 
3.
Approve Minutes from the June 1, 2022 City Council Meeting
4.
Approval of Contract No. C22182951 with Innovative Interfaces
Incorporated for use of its Online-Hosted Integrated Library System
(ILS) Software, Innovative Mobile App, and Implementation
Services, for a Five-Year Term and a Total Contract Not-To-Exceed
Amount 
of 
$983,388 
including 
a 
Ten-Percent
Contingency/Additional Services Amount
5.
Finance Committee Recommends the City Council Direct Staff to
Update the Park, Library, and Community Center Development
Impact Fee Nexus Study to Create New Fee Categories, Update the
Park Land Valuation to $17.6m, Move to a Square-foot basis for
Fees Imposed on Housing, and Conduct an Economic Feasibility
Study (Including on the Parkland Dedication Fee)
SUMMARY MINUTES 
Page 4 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
6.
Utilities Advisory Commission Recommend the City Council Adopt
the 2022 Annual Water Shortage Assessment Report
7.
Approval of Amendment No. 2 to Contract S20176879 with Johnson
Controls Fire Protection LP, to Add to the Scope of Services and
Increase the Contract Amount by $113,466 for a New Three-year
Contract Total Amount Not-to-Exceed of $379,050 for the Provision
of Fire Sprinkler System Inspections and Repair Services
8.
Approval of Contract Amendments to Extend Three Public-Private
Partnership Agreements Between the City of Palo Alto and
TheatreWorks, Palo Alto Players, and West Bay Opera for the use
of the Lucie Stern Community Theatre for an Additional Year
MOTION:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Kou 
to approve Agenda Item Numbers 3-8. 
MOTION PASSED Items 3, 6-8:  6-0-1, Stone absent 
MOTION PASSED Items 4: 5-1-1 Tanaka no, Stone absent 
MOTION PASSED Items 5: 4-2-1 Cormack, Tanaka no, Stone absent 
Council Member Cormack could not imagine a fee of over $100,000 for 
an apartment being feasible.   It was the City’s responsibility to identify 
parkland locations and create a plan before imposing large amounts of 
money on residents.  She requested to see more details regarding open 
space when the item returns. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed with Council Member Cormack’s 
comments regarding Item Five.  With regards to Item Four, the last 
feedback session was done 4-years ago.  Also, the proposed increase 
went from $126,000 per year to $197,000 per year and he wanted to 
understand what new features were being implemented that justified the 
increase.  
City Manager Comments 
Ed Shikada, City Manager announced that Santa Clara County instructed 
parents to contact their children’s doctors to determine the availability of 
the COVID-19 vaccine, timing and applicability.  The City continued to 
offer COVID-19 testing at various locations.  With respect to drought 
restrictions, folks were prohibited from using a hose without a nozzle, 
water outdoor irrigation for ornamental landscapes and washing hard 
surfaces.  The State of California issued new emergency regulations 
Page 5 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
prohibiting irrigating with drinking water in certain circumstances. At the 
June 20, 2022 City Council meeting, the Council will be considering 
actions for the next phase of the City’s pre-set drought condition of 
limiting landscaping and lawn irrigation to two days a week.  The City was 
seeking applicants for the vacant position on the Human Relations 
Commission (HRC) and applications were due July 27, 2022.  The City of 
Palo Alto invited the community to attend the open house at the Municipal 
Services Center on June 18, 2022.  On June 25, 2022 the City will host 
the World Music Day Concert at noon at Rinconada Park and then the 
Twilight Concert Series beginning at 6:30 p.m.  In recognition of Pet Care 
Assistance Month, Pets In Need would host pet care-focused assistance 
day on June 29, 2022.  Upcoming for the June 20, 2022 and June 21, 
2022 Council meetings was the City budget adoption, adoption of the 
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG), 2850 West Bayshore 
Residential Project review, potential gun sales regulations, reproductive 
rights resolution and consideration of 1237 San Antonio Road.  City 
Council’s summer break was scheduled from June 22, 2022 and would 
end on August 1, 2022. 
Action Items 
9.
Finance Committee Recommends Adoption of six Resolutions:
1) Approving the Fiscal Year 2023 Wastewater Collection Utility
Financial Plan, Including Proposed Transfer, and Adopting a
Wastewater 
Collection 
Utility 
Rate 
Increase 
by 
Amending
Wastewater Collection Rate Schedules S-1, S-2, S-6 and S-7;
2) Approving the FY 2023 Water Utility Financial Plan, Including
Proposed Transfer, and Adopting a Water Utility Rate Increase by
Amending Water Rate Schedules W-1, W-2, W-3, W-4, and W-7;
3) Approving FY 2023 Gas Utility Financial Plan, Including Proposed
Transfers, and Adopting a Gas Utility Rate Increase by Amending
Gas Rate Schedules G-1, G-2, G-3 and G-10;
4) Approving the FY 2023 Electric Utility Financial Plan, Including
Proposed Transfers and Amendments to the Electric Utility Reserve
Management Practices, Amending Utility Rate Schedules E-EEC-1,
E-NSE-1, E-2-G, E-4-G and E-7-G, and Adopting an Electric Utility
Rate Increase by Amending Utility Rate Schedules E-1, E-2, E-4, E-
4 TOU, E-7, E-7 TOU and E-14;
5) Amending Utility Rate Schedules EDF-1 and EDF-2 to Increase
Dark Fiber Rates 4.2 Percent; and
SUMMARY MINUTES 
Page 6 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
6) Amending Utility Rate Schedule D-1 Increasing the Storm Water
Management Fee by 4.20 Percent per Month per Equivalent
Residential Unit for FY 2023
Mayor Burt remarked the Council will hear about the Water Utility and the 
Wastewater Collection rates first.  Following those was the other utility 
rates and their respective financial plans.  
Utilities Director Dean Batchelor introduced Lisa Bilir and Erik Kensington 
who presented the item to the Council.  
Senior Resource Planner Lisa Bilir articulated that Staff proposed an 8.9 
percent overall rate increase for the Water Utility which was 4 percent in 
the distribution rate and a 15.9 percent increase on the commodity rate 
from San Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC).  The Operation 
Reserve at the end of Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 was at the maximum guideline 
level.  The forecast assumed water conservation of 10 percent during FY 
2022 and a recovery year in FY 2023.  For subsequent year Staff projected 
a 4 percent increase annually for FY 2024 through FY 2026.  The rate 
increase was to pay for seismic upgrades to reservoirs as well as costs for 
emergencies.  The plan used funds from the Capital Improvement Project 
(CIP) Reserve and Rate Stabilization Reserve throughout the forecast 
period to mitigate the rate increase.  The Utilities Advisory Commission 
(UAC) and the Finance Committee recommended that the City Council 
adopt the Staff recommendation. 
City Attorney Molly Stump confirmed for the Water and Wastewater Utility 
that the procedures were being conducted under procedures outlined in 
the California Constitution under Proposition 218. Notice of the hearing 
was mailed to all affected water and wastewater collection customers on 
April 20, 2022.  The City Clerk had accepted written protest for the 
proposed rate and continued to collect them until the close of the public 
hearing.  After the close of the public hearing, the City Clerk would 
tabulate the results.  If a majority of affected customers objected to the 
rate increase then the Council could not adopt the rate increase.  
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
Winter Dellenbach disclosed she did not understand the presentation. 
She was concerned about the Bay Area Water Supply and Conservation 
Agency (BAWSCA) lawsuit and how it synced up with the proposed 
increase.  She wanted to know if the proposed 25 percent rate increase 
being discussed by BAWSCA was part of Staff’s proposal.  She expressed 
concern about watering her mature trees and the amount of stress she 
was having due to not knowing what will happen. 
Page 7 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
Rebecca Eisenberg echoed Ms. Dellenbach’s concerns regarding the 
BAWSCA lawsuit and watering trees.  She recommended the Council 
agendize a discussion regarding the City’s Water Policy. 
Peter Drekmeier, Policy Director for the Tuolumne River Trust, referenced 
his letter that focused on BAWSCA’s proposal to raise the assessments on 
the member agencies by 25 percent.  Many residents voiced objections 
to BAWSCA about using rater payer dollars to sue the State Water Board 
over the Bay Delta Water Quality Control Plant.  Palo Alto should stand 
up and demand that ratepayer dollars not be used for the lawsuit. 
Council Member Filseth read that Palo Alto’s share of the lawsuit was 
$25,000 and he asked if that was accurate. 
Ms. Bilir answered yes.  
Council Member Filseth wanted to know if the City was required to pay it. 
Ms. Bilir explained the funds were built into the City’s membership 
assessment. 
Council Member Filseth pressed what would happen if the City paid 
$25,000 less than the City’s membership assessment. 
Ms. Bilir remarked the City cannot choose which part of the bill is paid. 
Ms. Stump requested the Mayor allow the City Clerk to count the written 
protests and determine if the count is half. 
City Clerk Lesley Milton announced the City received three written 
protests reposing the water rate increase. 
Mayor Burt understood the commodity rate increase was the pass-along 
cost from SFPUC for the City’s water supply.  That was not the City’s 
internal cost increase. 
Ms. Bilir confirmed that is correct. 
Mayor Burt wanted to understand what drove the commodity increase. 
Ms. Bilir explained due to the drought, SFPUC was experiencing a low 
number of units of water being sold and the fixed costs had to be spread 
over fewer gallons of water.  Another driver was the increased cost 
including the debt service cost.  
Page 8 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
 SUMMARY MINUTES 
Mayor Burt acknowledged it was unfortunate that while residents are 
conserving water, their bills have to go up due to the drought.  He 
understood the $25,000 for the BAWSCA lawsuit was spread over 3 years. 
Ms. Bilir concurred. 
Mayor Burt inquired how many agencies were in BAWSCA. 
Ms. Bilir answered 26. 
Mayor Burt asked if Palo Alto was the only city that supported the Bay 
Delta Plan and opposed the alternative. 
Ms. Bilir responded yes. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to 
adopt Resolution 10048 for the Water Utility: 
a. Approving the FY 2023 Water Utility Financial Plan; and
b. Approving a transfer of up to $13.964 million from the Capital
Improvement Program (CIP) Reserve to the Operations Reserve
in FY 2022; and
c. Increasing Water Utility Rates via the Amendment of Rate
Schedules W-1 (General Residential Water service), W-2 (Water
Service from Fire Hydrants), W3 (Fire Service Connections), W-
4 (Residential Master-Metered and General NonResidential
Water Service), and W-7 (Non-Residential Irrigation Water
Service) (Attachment B2);
Council Member Tanaka appreciated the bill comparison in the Staff report 
but noticed that many of the cities in the chart did not own their own 
utilities.  
City Manager Ed Shikada mentioned that all the agencies in the chart had 
a municipal water system. 
Ms. Bilir noted the chart included the City of Los Altos and the larger 
portion of the City of Menlo Park which used California Water Service 
District.  
Council Member Tanaka commented that Palo Alto had the highest 
monthly water bill for residents compared to neighboring agencies.   
Ms. Bilir clarified Redwood City was higher than Palo Alto. 
Page 9 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
 ACTION MINUTES 
Council Member Tanaka understood the motion was to increase the rates 
for both residential and commercial.  
Ms. Bilir confirmed that is correct. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if residential and commercial rates could 
be voted on separately.  
Ms. Stump assumed that the allocation between the rate classes should 
not be customized by Council and would have to be agendized for a future 
meeting.  One rate class should not subsidize the other. 
Council Member Tanaka could not support the motion due to the 
residential rates being the highest when compared to neighboring cities.  
Council Member DuBois noticed that the City of Santa Clara had lower 
water and electricity rates than Palo Alto.  
Ms. Bilir explained that the City of Santa Clara does not purchase all of 
its water from SFPUC. 
Senior Resource Planner Erik Kensington added that the City of Santa 
Clara had its own generation of electricity and they had a different 
customer mix. 
Mayor Burt remarked the cost of receiving water from the Hetch Hetchy 
system was better quality. 
MOTION PASSED: 5-1-1, Tanaka No, Stone absent 
Ms. Bilir indicated that Staff proposed a 3 percent increase for the 
Wastewater Collection System for FY 2023 with a 5 percent increase in 
the subsequent years.  The increase was to facilitate a more sustainable 
level of main replacement and to pay for the treatment cost increases to 
rebuild the infrastructure at the Regional Water Quality Control Plant 
(RWQCP).   The UAC and the Finance Committee recommended Council 
adopt the Staff recommendation. 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
Bob Moss recommended increases in water and water process rates be at 
the lower end of the proposal.  Both the availability and usage of water 
had changed significantly and it was usual for the State to be in a long-
term drought. 
Page 10 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
 SUMMARY MINUTES 
Rebecca Eisenberg asked if rate increases are the only tool the City could 
use to reduce water usage and what data did the City have that indicated 
that raising rates was an effective means of reducing water usage. 
Ms. Stump requested the clerk report on how many objections were 
received regarding the wastewater rate. 
Ms. Milton announced two protests were received for the wastewater 
rates. 
MOTION:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to adopt Resolution 10049 For the Wastewater Collection 
Utility,  
a. Approving the Fiscal Year 2023 Wastewater Collection Financial
Plan; and
b. Approving a transfer of up to $5.33 million from the Capital
Improvement Projects Reserve to the Operations Reserve in FY
2022; and
c. Increasing the Wastewater Collection Utility Rates via the
amendment of Rate Schedules S-1 (Residential Wastewater
Collection and Disposal), S-2 (Commercial Wastewater
Collection 
and 
Disposal), 
S-6 
(Restaurant 
Wastewater
Collection and Disposal) and S-7 (Commercial Wastewater
Collection and Disposal – Industrial Discharger) (Attachment
A2);
Council Member DuBois acknowledged that the City was funding many 
CIP projects and he found the proposal necessary. 
Council Member Cormack agreed with the necessity and understood the 
rates were composed of the collection portion and treatment of 
wastewater. 
Ms. Bilir answered yes. 
Council Member Cormack inquired if the wastewater charges were based 
on the volume of discharge from home or a flat rate. 
Ms. Bilir concurred for residential customers it was a flat monthly rate, for 
commercial it was based upon the usage from the prior winter months 
and for restaurant customers it was based on the prior month’s usage.  
Page 11 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
Council Member Tanaka inquired which cities in the comparison for 
monthly residential bills owned their wastewater system. 
Mayor Burt noted the City of Los Alto and the City of Mountain View were 
part of Palo Alto’s system. 
Ms. Bilir responded all the cities own their system. 
Council Member Tanaka asked why monthly wastewater bills for 
restaurants was higher when compared to other agencies.  
Ms. Bilir proclaimed Staff did review the difference but could not 
determine a reason why restaurants in Palo Alto were paying higher bills 
than other cities.  Palo Alto contained a unique mixture of restaurants 
that did not match the restaurant classes in other cities. 
Mayor Burt pointed out that the City has held significantly lower 
residential wastewater rates compared to San Mateo County for years. 
He appreciated the City making more investments in the long-term 
Capital Plan. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Stone absent 
Ms. Stump announced City Council would now discuss the rates that no 
longer required a formal hearing. 
Mr. Kensington reported Staff’s proposal was a 4 percent overall increase 
for the Gas Utility for FY 2023 and a 4 percent increase for subsequent 
years.  The increase was due to increases in operations, maintenance, 
CIP costs and sales decreases due to the COVID-19 Pandemic.  Gas supply 
continued to increase and was at its highest levels compared to the past 
15 years.  The UAC and the Finance Committee recommended the City 
Council adopt Staff’s recommendation.  
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
None 
MOTION:  Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member DuBois to 
adopt Resolution 10050 For the Gas Utility,  
a. Approving the FY 2023 Gas Utility Financial Plan (Linked
Document); and
b. Approving a transfer of up to $3 million from the Operations
Reserve to the CIP Reserve in FY 2022; and
SUMMARY MINUTES  
Page 12 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
c. Approving a transfer of up to $2.766 million from the Rate
Stabilization Reserve to the Operations Reserve in FY 2022;
and
d. Increasing gas rates by amending Rate Schedules G-1
(Residential Gas Service), G-2 (Residential Master-Metered
and Commercial Gas Service), G-3 (Large Commercial Gas
Service), and G-10 (Compressed Natural Gas Service)
(Attachment C2);
Mayor Burt believed the City was moving in a cautiously prudent direction. 
Council Member Tanaka understood the cities listed on the bill comparison 
chart were cities that did not own their Gas Utility.  
Mr. Kensington confirmed that is correct. 
Council Member Tanaka expected Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E) to be 
higher because cities were renting the utility versus owning it.  He noticed 
PG&E was lower than the City in the summer months.  
Mr. Kensington explained that PG&E did not have a fixed monthly charge 
like Palo Alto.  
Council Member Tanaka asked what percentage of the total cost was for 
the commodity cost. 
Mr. Kensington answered that historically supply costs are one-third of 
the overall rate but recently supply costs had increased significantly.  
Council Member Tanaka inquired why commercial customers in the 
50,000 therms per month were higher than PG&E. 
Mr. Kensington remarked that PG&E had a declining block structure for 
their gas rates. 
Council Member Tanaka assumed PG&E paid no transfers to their 
investors. 
Assistant 
Director 
for 
Utilities 
Resource 
Management 
Jonathan 
Abendschein stated there was a range of different taxes and transfers 
that PG&E pays for. 
Council Member Tanaka expected the City’s rates to be lower than PG&E’s 
across the board. 
SUMMARY MINUTES  
Page 13 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
Mayor Burt could not follow Council Member Tanaka’s analogy. 
Council Member Tanaka explained that Palo Alto owned its Gas Utility and 
other cities do not own their Gas Utility.  The other cities were leasing the 
service from PG&E.  The City should have lower rates compared to cities 
that lease the service.  
MOTION PASSED: 5-1, Tanaka no, Stone absent 
Mr. Kensington reported Staff’s recommendation was a 5 percent rate increase. 
The City saw decreased sales during the COVID-19 Pandemic but sales were 
improving slowly.  With the drought, there had been very low hydroelectric 
output.  Staff proposed to exhaust the Hydro Stabilization Reserve as well as 
pull $5 million from the Electric Stabilization Reserve to keep the Operations 
Reserve within guideline levels.  The Hydro Rate Adjuster was activated on April 
1st, 2022 and due to the projected lack of revenue coming in.  The Hydro 
Stabilization Reserve would continue at the 1.3 cents per kilowatt level.  For 
subsequent years, Staff proposed a 5 to 7 percent increase and this included 
electrification measures.  The loan payments to the Electric Special Project 
Reserve were rescheduled to FY 2025/2026.  Operation costs had increased due 
to the City having to hirer contract help for operations and maintenance work.  
The UAC and Finance Committee recommended the Council adopts the Staff 
recommendation.  
PUBLIC COMMENT 
None 
Council Member Cormack appreciated Staff’s work over the years to prepare the 
City for unknown circumstances.  The proposal assumed that the City will have 
to have a bond to finance the City’s ability to modernize the grid to support folks 
moving from gas to electricity.  She inquired if Item Nine of the recommendation 
was the solar rate. 
Mr. Kensington confirmed it corresponded with SFPUC’s Net Energy Metering 
(NEM) 3 Program but the City was no longer impacted by the program.  The City 
no longer netted from NEM 2 customers. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
DuBois to adopt Resolution 10051 For the Electric Utility:  
1. Approving the Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 Electric Financial Plan
2. Approve a transfer of up to $15 million from the Hydro
Stabilization Reserve to the Supply Operations Reserve;
SUMMARY MINUTES  
Page 14 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
3. Approve a transfer of up to $5 million from the Electric Special
Projects (ESP) reserve to the Supply Operations Reserve;
4. Approve an allocation of Cap and Trade funds up to 1/3 of REC
revenue to the Cap and Trade Program Reserve to be spent
on local decarbonization programs;
5. Approve amendments to the Electric Utility Reserves
Management Practices, Section 6: Electric Special Projects
(ESP) Reserve:
a. Change the date by which the funds for the ESP Reserve
must be committed to the end of FY 2025, instead of by
the end of FY 2017; and
b. Change the date by which any uncommitted ESP Reserve
funds will be transferred to the Electric Supply Operation
Reserve and the ESP Reserve closed to the end of FY 2030,
instead of FY 2022.
6. Approve an increase to retail electric rates E-1 (Residential
Electric Service), E-2 (Small Non-Residential Electric Service),
E-4 (Medium Non-Residential Electric Service), E-4 TOU
(Medium Non-Residential Time of Use Electric Service), E-7
(Large Non-Residential Electric Service), E-7 TOU (Large Non-
Residential Time of Use Electric Service) and E-14 (Street
Lights) of 5% effective July 1, 2022;
7. Update the Export Electricity Compensation (EEC-1) rate to
reflect current projections of avoided cost, effective July 1,
2022;
8. Update the Net Surplus Electricity Compensation Rate (E-NSE)
rate to reflect current projections of avoided cost, effective
July 1, 2022;
9. Update the Palo Alto Green program pass-through premium
charge on the Residential Master-Metered and Small Non-
Residential Green Power Electric Service   (E-2-G), the Medium
Non-Residential Green Power Electric Service (E-4-G), and the
Large Non-Residential Green Power Electric Service (E-7-G)
rate schedules to reflect current costs, effective July 1, 2022
Page 15 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
Council Member Cormack acknowledged that the Electric Utility will 
change over the next several years and folks should be prepared for the 
City to invest more. 
Council Member DuBois echoed Council Member Cormack’s comments.  
He asked how the City remained competitive with its Electric Utility. 
Mr. Kensington answered Staff constantly evaluated the current contracts 
and that Staff will be evaluating what the City’s electric mix will be going 
forward. 
Mr. Abendschein added one advantage was that public utilities are smaller 
and able to be more agile.  Another was that there are no transfers to 
investors and debt could be issued with tax advantages.  Historically Palo 
Alto has committed to public power partnerships and that was a source 
of advantages. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if contracted land crew costs were the main 
driver for increased operating costs for FY 2022 and 2023. 
Mr. Kensington answered yes. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired if other cities were seeing the same 
increase for contracted land crews. 
Mr. Batchelor responded yes. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to know how much of the Staffing budget 
the contracted land crew made up. 
Mr. Batchelor predicted $750,000 annually. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired if the City of Santa Clara had its own 
electric utility.  
Mr. Kensington stated yes but they had a different generation mix than 
Palo Alto.  
Council Member Tanaka asked why their electric bills were substantially 
lower than Palo Altos. 
Council Member Filseth remarked they use more natural gas. 
Mr. Abendschein mentioned Palo Alto had a large concentration of large 
commercial customers and that helped with rates while the City of Santa 
Clara had more industrial uses. 
Page 16 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
Council Member Tanaka asked how the rates scaled in terms of usage.  
Mr. Kensington noted the more folks used the utility the higher the price. 
Council Member Tanaka asked what percentage of the City of Santa Clara 
used natural gas. 
Mr. Kensington commented he did not know. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to know how the City of Santa Clara 
compared to Palo Alto in size.  
Mr. Kensington did not know. 
Mayor Burt highlighted that the City was 50 percent below what PG&E 
charged for their electric utility.  He recalled that PG&E proposed a rate 
increase of 20 percent. 
Mr. Kensington confirmed PG&E was proposing an increase. 
Mayor Burt inquired if the transmission cost was embedded into the 
commodity cost. 
Mr. Kensington answered yes. 
Mayor Burt predicted transmission costs will continue to increase.  He 
wanted to know what nomenclature was used to describe the City’s raw 
commodity cost.  
Mr. Kensington answered it was called power purchase. 
Mayor Burt mentioned as the City explores electrification, the cost 
through the power purchase agreements may decline significantly but 
transmission costs will increase.  He noticed there was no commodity cost 
increase from FY 2022 to FY 2023. 
Mr. Kensington confirmed there was a slight increase but there was also 
a decrease in sales. 
Mayor Burt stated the City used 100 percent carbon neutral electricity 
and as the City continued to move towards electrification.  The costs 
compared to PG&E would become more favorable for Palo Alto customers. 
Strategic Business Manager Dave Yuan responded to Council Member 
Tanaka’s question that the Hotline Contract for FY 2023 was $4.7 million 
out of a budget of $5.9 million. 
Page 17 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to know how much the contract line work 
was for the total budget. 
Mr. Yuan answered roughly 11 percent of the total Distribution Budget. 
Council Member Tanaka asked how many of PG&E’s metros cities were 
carbon-free. 
Mr. Kensington requested to provide the answer at a later time. 
Mayor Burt noted PG&E in 2019 was 34 percent natural gas and PG&E 
used 9 percent of nuclear power. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Stone absent 
Mr. Kensington mentioned the EDF-1 and EDF-2 rates increased annually 
based on the change in CPI for the San Francisco region.  For FY 2023, 
the proposal was a 4.2 percent increase. 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
None 
MOTION: Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
adopt Resolution 10052 Amending Utility Rate Schedules EDF-1 and 
EDF-2 (Attachment E1) to increase Dark Fiber Rates 4.2 percent; 
Council Member Tanaka appreciated that Staff provided the City’s 
revenue compared to the City’s cost for the other utilities.  He asked if 
there was a slide for those breakdowns for Dark Fiber. 
Mr. Kensington answered no. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to know how the commodity cost had 
changed. 
Council Member DuBois reminded the Council that the Dark Fiber rate was 
not a rate the City wanted folks to use and that the main rate stayed flat. 
Mr. Kensington confirmed that is correct.  Staff continued to move 
customers to the EDF-3 rate which had not changed since 2006. 
Mr. Yuan stated there was no commodity cost for Dark Fiber and expenses 
for the Dark Fiber Fund were $2 million to $3 million and revenue was $4 
million annually.  CIP costs had increased because the system had to be 
rebuilt but there was no increase in the operation costs. 
Page 18 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Stone absent 
Mr. Kensington announced there was no presentation for the Storm Water 
Management Fee. 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
None 
MOTION: Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to 
adopt Resolution 10053 Amending Utility Rate Schedule D-1 increasing 
the Storm Water Management Fee by 4.2 percent consistent with the 
applicable Consumer Price Index. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked there was little detail on how much the 
cost had changed for the Storm Water Management Fee.  He predicted 
that due to the drought there was less stormwater than normal.  
Mr. Abendschein recalled the proposal was a series of planned increases 
that were approved by voters to rebuild the stormwater system. 
Council Member Tanaka encouraged the City not to increase rates if it 
was not needed.  He wanted to know the current state of the stormwater 
system. 
Mr. Shikada reminded that the Council receives an annual report and had 
it recently discussed the topic with the Stormwater Management 
Oversight Committee. 
Council Member Cormack recalled there were 14 projects in the 
stormwater plan that the Stormwater Oversight Committee was working 
on. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-0-1, Stone absent 
[The Council took a short break] 
10.
Policy and Services Committee Recommendations on Pending State
Assembly Bills 2181 (VTA) and 1944, 2449, and 2647 (Local
Meeting Procedures)
Deputy 
City 
Manager 
Chantal 
Cotton 
Gaines 
announced 
Staff 
recommended support for Assembly Bill (AB) 1944, AB 2449 and AB 
2647.  With respect to AB 2181, the Policy and Services Committee (P&S) 
recommended that the Council discuss the bill.  Many cities had opposed 
AB 2181 or opposed it unless it was amended. 
Page 19 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
Townsend Public Affairs Legislative Consultant Niccolo De Luca added AB 
1944 was to be heard in the Senate Governance and Finance Committee 
soon.  AB 2449 proposed a similar process as AB 1944 which allowed 
members of a legislative body of a local agency to do teleconferencing 
without identifying each teleconference location.  AB 2647 was also to be 
reviewed by Senate Governance and Finance Committee very soon.  The 
bill allowed writings that had been distributed to members of a legislative 
body of a local agency less than 72 hours before an open meeting to be 
posted to satisfy the Brown Act requirements.  With respect to AB 2181, 
the bill was set to be heard on June 28, 2022, by the Senate 
Transportation Committee. 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
Rebecca Eisenberg stated that Staff’s presentations are usually very 
helpful and was frustrated by the lack of Staff presentation for the item.  
She mentioned that some decisions made by the Council did not reflect 
the community’s decisions.  She asked which of the proposed measures 
increased the community’s ability to participate and which minimized it. 
Council Member DuBois asked why there were no housing bills, police bills 
and other infrastructure bills being presented. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines indicated that P&S had reviewed many bills and some 
will be coming forward on the Consent Calendar.  
Council Member DuBois noticed that P&S had unanimous voted on some 
bills but not on others.  He suggested bringing all the bills to Council so 
that Council did not have to pull items from the Consent Calendar.  He 
did not support AB 1944 and believed requiring a quorum of Council 
Members to be within the jurisdiction was a good requirement.  Locally, 
the City had a limit on how many Council Members could attend a meeting 
remotely.  He asked if that would still be allowed if one of the laws passed. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines answered yes. 
Council Member DuBois commented the City could make similar points 
regarding AB 2181 that the City of Mountain View made.  Palo Alto had 
the busiest Caltrain station and many folks in Palo Alto commuted by rail.  
He wanted to see advocacy for representation in the north county and he 
recommended the City oppose AB 2181 unless it was amended. 
Council Member Cormack aligned her comments with Council Member 
DuBois regarding AB 1944 and AB 2449.  She voted against the bills at 
the P&S meeting because there had been prior disagreements amongst 
Page 20 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
the Council on the matter.  She supported having a set maximum of how 
many times a Council Member could attend meetings remotely.  She 
preferred AB 2449 over AB 1944.  She was surprised to see there may 
not be unanimous support for AB 2181.  She encouraged the Council to 
support AB 2181 in concept or support with amendments because there 
were a lot of improvements in terms of rebalancing the power. 
Council Member Filseth believed there were good reasons to have a 
quorum physically present in the legislative chamber but that was not a 
function of the Brown Act.  The purpose of the Brown Act was to prevent 
secret meetings and due to technology, there was no reason for the public 
to be present at each remote location.  He supported AB 1944 and AB 
2449.  With respect to AB 2181, he agreed the geographical 
representation was balanced incorrectly and limiting the pool of Directors 
to Electives would constrain the recruitment of experts.  As written, AB 
2181 was too prescriptive on the process. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed with Council Member Filseth that 
technology had made participation and access easier for everyone.  He 
supported what AB 1944 was trying to do.  With regards to AB 2181, he 
remarked Valley Transit Authority (VTA) was not user-friendly.  He agreed 
the north county’s voice was limited with VTA.  He supported AB 2181 
because it was an attempt to solve the problem. 
Vice Mayor Kou commented that the use of technology and 
teleconferencing could be misused and overused.  There was an obligation 
to the general public that Council Members be in Chambers to deliberate 
and discuss topics.  She supported AB 2647 and believed placing all 
documents in one place for the public to access was a good idea.  With 
respect to AB 2181, many members of the VTA Policy Advocacy Group 
were concerned about the bill.  The City was already underrepresented 
and AB 2181 exacerbated the problem more.  She wanted to see more 
deliberation on the bill and more dialog with other cities to determine 
what the best way to move forward was.  She supported writing a letter 
opposing AB 2181. 
Mayor Burt supported AB 2647 and he echoed Council Member Filseth’s 
points about AB 1944 and AB 2449 regarding the Brown Act.  He 
supported the concept that a majority of the legislative body should be 
present in the jurisdiction.   Remote participation had allowed easier 
transitions between meetings and that was a valuable improvement for 
official participation.  The bill did not address the public being able to 
participate remotely if officials participated remotely and that should be 
highlighted in a letter of support with amendments.  With respect to AB 
Page 21 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES  
2181, he acknowledged there was a strong lack of support from agencies 
that counted on VTA.  He found the City of Mountain View’s perspective 
on AB 2181 very thoughtfully.  He recommended striking the language 
about alternate members being required to attend all Board meetings, to 
reference the north county guidelines regarding other agencies or 
background checks, to clarify the two VTA Staff members will serve the 
group of VTA Board Members and to retain the language about the 
majority approval. 
MOTION:  Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth to: 
1. Support AB 2647
2. Support AB 2449/AB 1944 provided:
a. There are requirements for participation of a quorum within
jurisdiction
b. Members are allowed to participate remotely as long as
members of the public are allowed to participate remotely
Council Member Cormack understood members of the public were 
covered under AB 1944 and AB 2449. 
Mr. De Luca confirmed that is correct. 
Council Member Cormack supported the motion with AB 1944 removed.  
AB 2449 required a quorum and AB 1944 did not.  
Council Member Filseth found it essential that the public be allowed to 
participate in meetings remotely. 
Council Member Tanaka did not support the requirement that a quorum 
be present within a jurisdiction.  
Council Member Cormack remarked the item could not be separated. 
MOTION PASSED:  6-0-1, Stone absent 
MOTION: Mayor Burt, seconded by Council Member Filseth to:  
3. Oppose AB 2181 (VTA) unless amended, to propose
modifications listed within the City of Mountain View letter with
the changes regarding background qualifications; deleting
requirements mandating alternates to attend all board
Page 22 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
meetings; deletion of a unanimous requirement for selection 
of alternates. 
Council Member DuBois summarized that the City of Mountain View's 
proposal was to continue the use of the current groups.  He asked how 
many Board Members that accounted for.  
Mayor Burt answered 12. 
Transportation Director Phillip Kami concurred the two ex-officio members 
were not included in the 12 members. 
Council Member DuBois inquired if they were excluded from closed 
sessions. 
Mayor Burt commented they could participate in discussion but they do 
not vote and could not participate in closed sessions. 
Council Member DuBois asked if the 12 member Board appointed the two 
ex-officio members. 
Mayor Burt answered yes. 
Council Member Filseth stated the letter from the City of Mountain View 
cleaned up the convolution and complexity of the text of AB 2181.  He 
understood the Directors are supposed to be elected officials and it did 
not address the geographic distribution problem. 
Mayor Burt believed it was better to leave it as is with elected officials. 
Council Member Filseth remarked the main difference between AB 2181 
and the City of Mountain View’s letter was the ex-officio members. 
Mr. Kamhi noted there were suggestions from the City of Mountain View 
to provide training, the commitment to the position and other modest 
changes. 
Council Member Filseth agreed AB 2181 was better than current 
regulations.  
MOTION PASSED: 5-1-1, Cormack no, Stone absent 
11. Revenue-Generating Ballot Measures (Affirmation of the Natural Gas
Utility Transfer and New Business Tax): Direction to Staff on Key
Policy Questions and Measure Characteristics, and Direction to
Return with Final Documents for Placement of Ballot Measure(s) on
SUMMARY MINUTES  
Page 23 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
the November 2022 Election and a Non-Binding Resolution for 
Intended Use of Business Tax Proceeds  
City Manager Ed Shikada announced that Staff would be returning on June 
20, 2022 with completed documents for placement of a Business Tax on 
the November 2022 ballot, affirm the draft resolution of intent regarding 
the use of the Business Tax proceeds and bring forward completed 
documents for placement of measures to affirm the Gas Utility Transfer 
on the November 2022 ballot. 
Assistant Finance Director Christine Paras remarked that Staff had 
conducted substantial and extensive direct stakeholder outreach which 
formed the community’s highest priorities.  The community survey 
received 433 respondents, Staff conducted over six focus group sessions 
and one listening session. 
FM 3 Consulting Dave Metz reported the third survey tested specific ballot 
measures concepts, tested model ballot language and arguments for and 
against to see how voters reacted to them.  The survey was conducted 
via phone and online interviews with 463 voters in Palo Alto.  For the first 
time in recent years, residents believed that the City was moving in the 
wrong direction.  A hypothetical ballot measure language was tested with 
half of the sample tested with a tax rate of $0.10 per square foot for 
commercial properties and the other half was tested at $0.12 per square 
foot.  The language was developed with the help of the City Attorney’s 
Office.  The survey indicated that three out of five voters would vote yes 
for the Business Tax.  Three-quarters of Democrats supported the 
Business Tax, seven out of ten women supported the Business Tax and 
four in five voters under the age of 50 supported the Business Tax.  The 
Gas Utility Transfer also had support from nearly three out of five voters 
but support was tentative.  Nearly two-thirds of Democrats backed the 
Gas Utility Transfer and two-thirds of Business Tax supporters also backed 
the Gas Utility Transfer.  Roughly half of the surveyors backed each 
measure when asked to consider both measures together.   A series of 
questions asked about the financial structure of a Business Tax, potential 
exemptions, phasing of the measure and other items.  Many surveyors 
supported exempting seasonal businesses, grocery stores and the first 
5,000 square feet of each business from the tax.  Three in five supported 
a cap on inflation increases.  For potential uses of the revenue, voters 
prioritized improving response to crime.  Pro and con arguments were 
shared with surveyors and that resulted in 56 percent in support of the 
Business Tax and 38 percent opposing the Business Tax.  Many voters 
indicated they supported the Gas Utility Transfer but were not fully 
committed to voting for it.  In conclusion, there was broad conceptual 
Page 24 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
support for establishing a Business Tax and Gas Utility Transfer but the 
support was soft for both measures. 
Ms. Paras highlighted the Gas Utility Transfer affirmed the City’s historical 
practice of annually transferring funds to the General Fund (GF) from the 
Gas Fund.  Services funded by the Gas Utility Transfer included police 
units, 911 dispatch staffing, library, fire/emergency medical response 
staff and many community services.  Those services would have to be cut 
if the voters did not affirm the Gas Utility Transfer.  The purpose of the 
Business Tax was to fund general government services and programs.  
The Resolution of Intent for spending the revenue included new/enhanced 
services, train crossing safety, affordable housing/unhoused services and 
investments in the downtown core streetscapes/pedestrian plazas.  Based 
on Council’s direction on April 25, 2022, Staff prepared two elements of 
additional research and analysis.  The first was the Sales and Use Tax 
Offset and the impact was approximately $1.3 million to $3 million across 
all businesses in the City.  The second analysis was the Transient 
Occupancy Tax (TOT) Remittal Offset Impact which resulted in additional 
tax revenue to the City of $200,000 to $300,000 annually.  With respect 
to square footage by sector, roughly 1/3 of businesses in Palo Alto would 
not be assessed by the Business Tax under the 5,000-square foot 
exemption.  For office, flex and industrial, the majority of the taxpayers 
fell within the 20,000 to 100,000-square foot range with two businesses 
in the City falling in the 500,000-square feet or higher category.  For retail 
and restaurants, the majority were exempt.  Staff was seeking direction 
from the Council on the effective date of tax assessment, treatment of 
vacant 
property, 
calculation 
of 
square 
footage 
for 
multiple 
locations/facilities, 
residential 
property, 
properties 
that 
were 
management businesses and offset/credit allocations.  By August 12, 
2022, the City must submit to the County Registrar of Voters either one 
or both measures to be placed on the ballot.  Once Council voted to place 
the measures on the ballot, Staff transitioned to a fact-based 
informational-only status to align with election laws.  If the measures 
were passed in November 2022, the Gas Utility Transfer Measure would 
be effective immediately and the first collection for the Business Tax was 
to be no earlier than January 2024. 
Council Member DuBois inquired if the survey tested pro and con 
messages for the Gas Utility Transfer. 
Mr. Metz answered no, it only tested them for the Business Tax. 
Council Member DuBois wanted to know how many businesses there were 
for each square footage category. 
Page 25 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
Finance Director Kiley Nose remarked Staff did not have the data 
aggregated like that. 
Council Member DuBois understood the Council wanted to phase in the 
Business Tax over 2 years but the ordinance indicated it would be phased 
in over 3-years. 
Ms. Nose stated that was not the intent. 
Council Member Tanaka recalled the proposal was to tax $0.10 to $0.12 
per square foot per month instead of annually as suggested in the ballot 
language tested. 
Mr. Metz answered the survey asked the same question in a variety of 
different ways in the previous surveys and the results were very 
consistent.  He predicted that voters did not have a lot of context for what 
businesses were paying. 
Council Member Tanaka believed the impact would be drastically different 
if businesses were paying a specific amount monthly rather than annually. 
Ms. Nose noted Council Member DuBois was right and there was a typo 
in the rate section on Packet Page 304, Section 4 (b).  The year in Section 
4 (b) should be 2024 instead of 2025. 
Council Member Cormack did not understand the difference between the 
questions limiting the annual increase for inflation of 5 percent and 
automatically adjusting the tax by up to 5 percent each year to adjust for 
inflation.  
Mr. Metz explained the questions expressed the same thing but where 
described differently. 
Council Member Cormack asked if there was another category that was 
not office or retail. 
Ms. Paras noted the category not included in the square footage by sector 
slide was hospitality.  
Council Member Cormack asked if the City will prorate the fee for vacant 
spaces. 
Mr. Shikada explained the concept for the quarterly calculation was to 
avoid proration. 
Page 26 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
Council Member Cormack wanted to know if the City would be supplying 
business categories for folks to choose from. 
Ms. Paras specified the City would use the North American Industry 
Classification System (NAICS) Code. 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
Bob Moss mentioned that Palo Alto was the only city in the State of 
California that did not have a Business License Tax.  The impact that the 
businesses had on the requirement for City services and the jobs-housing 
imbalance was significant.  He supported $0.12 per square foot but 
inquired how the City determined the exemption of 5,000 square feet.  He 
recommended there be no exemption and that businesses below 5,000 
square feet be charged a lower rate.  He wanted to see language that 
reflected that the City was allowed to raise taxes instead of the City 
having the option to raise taxes. 
Hamilton Hitchings supported the Gas Utility Transfer Tax because it 
directly funded community services.  He also supported the Business Tax 
because the revenue enhanced programs in the City, funded affordable 
housing, helped with homelessness and funded safer rail crossings.  He 
cautioned about discouraging retail and suggested any Sales Tax paid 
should be deducted from the Business Tax. 
Rebecca Eisenberg stated the proposed Business Tax was bad because it 
was a regressive tax.  The City was wasting resources on conducting 
surveys and the City should have explored what neighboring cities where 
doing.  The proposed Business Tax was unconstitutional because it lacked 
a reason to tax a business on the size of its office. 
Dan Kostenbauder, Vice President for Tax Policy at the Silicon Valley 
Leadership Group, spoke on behalf of the Palo Alto Community Business 
Alliance.  The concern was that the City was exploring a General Tax that 
directed all new revenue to the General Fund.  A Special Tax with defined 
objectives would have gained more support from the community.  The 
Alliance provided an alternative Business Tax that was more in alignment 
with neighboring city’s Business Tax and it would provide more protection 
for small businesses. 
Charlie Weidanz spoke on behalf of the Palo Alto Chamber of Commerce 
and requested the Business License Tax not be implemented until 
business owners had recovered from the COVID-19 Pandemic.  The 
Chamber echoed the concern that the tax was a General Tax and not a 
Special Tax. 
Page 27 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
John Shenk highlighted that the polls showed that residents believed the 
City was heading in the wrong direction.  New taxes were not what the 
community wanted, nor did the community want a General Tax.  He 
encouraged the City to work with the business community and not against 
it.  
Council Member Cormack appreciated that the ordinance included 
provisions about having audits.  She asked what the net total revenue 
would be if the City implemented a $0.10 per square foot tax with 
administration costs, offsets and credits subtracted.  
Ms. Paras estimated $18 million to $19 million. 
Council Member Cormack assumed there would be potential cuts to 
services if voters did not reaffirm the Gas Utility Transfer. 
Ms. Nose explained the FY 2023 Proposed Budget included the restoration 
of the services with limited-term funding.  If ongoing funding was not 
identified for those services then they would sunset in 2-years. 
Council Member Cormack inquired if Staff had received additional 
feedback on modifications to the Business Tax from the business 
community. 
Mr. Shikada stated the primary concern was the tax rate, the square 
footage exemption and the Consumer Price Index (CPI) escalation. 
Council Member Cormack believed the language was straight forward 
given the complexity.  She supported completely exempting senior 
housing and the proposal before the Council indicated that the City had a 
complex economic ecosystem. 
Mayor Burt agreed the City was an extreme outliner without having a 
Business Tax.  He stated it was incorrect that the City of East Palo Alto 
and the City of San Francisco’s Business Tax was in alignment with Palo 
Alto’s tax system.  The City of East Palo Alto’s Business Tax was twice 
what Palo Alto was considering and the City of San Francisco had five 
different overlapping taxes.  Even if Palo Alto approved its highest 
proposed rate, that was drastically lower than the City of San Francisco. 
The scale of the Business Tax as proposed was ½ percent of the average 
office rate.  He encouraged the Council to consider the current context, 
the current political situation, the state of the economy and inflation.  All 
those components made it not a favorable time to implement a Business 
Tax.  He was open to adjusting the terms of the Business Tax to arrive at 
consensus with the business community on form, scale and a set of 
Page 28 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
exemptions.  He struggled with the square footage exemption threshold 
and recommended raising it to 7,000 square feet.  He supported having 
the Business Tax sunset but did not support the 5 percent cap for CPI 
rollover.  The three focused areas for the revenue should be grade 
separations, affordable housing and public safety. 
Council Member DuBois found the ordinance well written and very 
detailed.  The proposal had been analyzed, debated, reviewed and refined 
over many years.  Many neighboring cities had very old ordinances and 
were seeking to modernize their tax.  He predicted it would not be a fast 
process to return to the voter in the future if the City adopted a small tax. 
The last round of polling was conducted in an active negative campaign 
and there was no corresponding positive campaign.   This was reflected 
if the March 2022 survey was compared with the May 2022 survey.  He 
wanted the support resolution to be very specific and he supported using 
the revenue for public safety, affordable housing/homelessness and 
transportation.  He supported the aggregation for particular business 
owners.  He asked why residential common areas and rental offices were 
included in the Business Tax. 
Ms. Paras believed Staff was trying to exclude residential dwellings. 
Council Member DuBois supported Council Member Cormack’s comment 
to understand the net revenue with the exclusion of residential buildings. 
Ms. Nose explained Staff did not know the floor plans for those facilities 
and would have to reach out to each business. 
Council Member DuBois inquired if Staff had a high-level assumption. 
Ms. Nose answered no. 
Council Member DuBois wanted to know how Staff proposed to handle 
folks who stay at a hotel for more than 30-days. 
Ms. Nose informed that if an individual established a contractual 
arrangement to stay longer than 30-days.  Then that was not considered 
short term and the Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) receipts would no 
longer be paid. 
Council Member DuBois wondered if the proposed definition of square 
footage was sufficient in terms of how it was measured.  He remarked it 
made sense not to tax vacant property but was concerned about folks 
leaving properties vacant.  He questioned the definition of vacant property 
and believed there were a lot of gray areas. 
Page 29 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES  
Ms. Nose remarked the generalized definition of vacancy identified that 
the space was free from furniture, fixtures and equipment. 
Council Member DuBois clarified that the definition was good but there 
was a time element that was missing. 
Ms. Nose answered that was why Staff included language about an active 
proration through a quarterly remittance.  Any grey areas would go 
through an administrative procedure. 
Council Member Tanaka shared that the country was facing high inflation 
rates, a bear market and many large corporations were laying off 
employees.  Many folks had not returned to Palo Alto to work and that 
had greatly affected TOT.  He believed now was not the time to implement 
a Business Tax.  The City should be doing an economic analysis to 
determine what the impacts would be if a Business Tax was implemented. 
Council Member Filseth found the proposal to be the right balance.  The 
City needed affordable housing and the only way to build it was through 
sustainable funding such as a tax.  Without a Business Tax, the City would 
never be able to build more affordable housing.  He echoed Mayor Burt’s 
comment that a tax of $0.10 per square foot per month was not much 
more than 1 percent of what most large businesses paid in rent.  He did 
not believe businesses would move out of the City because of such a small 
percentage.   He commented that large affordable housing foundations 
wanted to build affordable housing but never provided funding for it.  They 
paid to campaign against the City implementing a Business Tax when they 
should be using those funds to build more affordable housing.  
Council Member DuBois agreed the Business Tax required a small 
percentage of funds from businesses.  He found Staff’s proposal for the 
offset ratio interesting and supported the 75 percent Discretionary Tax.  
He agreed the current status of the economy was transitory but stated 
the tax would be a long-term tax. He asked the Council to consider putting 
off the Gas Utility Transfer.  He suggested deleting transportation from 
the revenue list and replacing it with parks and roads.  He urged Staff to 
evaluate the City of Pasadena’s language from their polling for their 
Business Tax. 
MOTION:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to 
direct staff to: 
A. Return to the City Council on June 20 with completed documents
for placement of a ballot measure on the November 2022 election
Page 30 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
for affirmation of the natural gas utility transfer as outlined in 
Attachment D and summarized in Table 2. 
i.
Consider adding parks and roads and deleting transportation
from the gas tax language
B. Return to the City Council with completed documents for
placement of a ballot measure on the November 2022 election for
a new business tax with the following refinements:
i.
Effective date and timing of tax assessment of $.10 per
square foot per month: retrospective basis beginning
January 1, 2023, lump sum due early 2024; quarterly
beginning January 1, 2025, delinquent within 30 days
ii.
Vacant property not be assessed as part of tax; business to
report vacant square footage and apply for an offset
iii.
Businesses with multiple locations and/or facilities: square
footage and offsets/credits to be assessed in the aggregate
iv.
Residential property/use: exclude all residential property
v.
Property management businesses: areas occupied by
property management functions
vi.
Offset for sales and use tax using a 2:1 ratio up to 75% of
business tax liability
vii.
Offset for transient occupancy tax remittance using a 1:1
ratio for business tax liability
C. Return to City Council with a final Resolution to inform the public
of Council’s intentions regarding use of Business Tax proceeds if
passed by voters with the following refinements:
i.
Delete economic development services from the ballot
measure language on the business tax
ii.
Inform the public of the city uses; propose 33% for public
safety, 33% for housing and homeless programs and 33%
for transportation.
City Attorney Molly Stump remarked general services must be retained to 
maintain the measure as a General Tax.  She inquired if Item B (4) did 
not intend to include hotels that operate as extended stay locations. 
Council Member DuBois answered no. 
Mayor Burt stated the revenue uses are in the interest of the business 
community.  The argument that this was the wrong time to implement a 
tax was made many times in prior years when there was a strong 
economy.  He suggested Council consider a sunset provision for the 
Business Tax as well as consider eliminating the rollover for CPI. 
Page 31 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
Council Member DuBois was not supportive of including those in the 
motion.  
Mayor Burt wanted to explore having a compromise that satisfied 
opposition campaigns.  He suggested an Ad Hoc Committee be formed to 
meet with groups in opposition within the next week and try to reach a 
consensus. 
Ms. Nose proposed clean-up language to the motion. 
Council Member DuBois clarified he was referring to grade separations 
when the word transportation is used in the motion. 
Mayor Burt preferred to see the revenue be split evenly among public 
safety, affordable housing and transportation.  
Council Member DuBois agreed. 
Council Member Cormack asked what work would the Ad Hoc Committee 
be doing if the motion passed. 
Mayor Burt explained the motion directed Staff to prepare a measure and 
the Ad Hoc Committee would explore with the business community a 
variation of the proposal that facilitated consensus. 
Council Member Cormack asked how Staff felt about the language 
changes for the ballot question. 
Ms. Stump articulated Staff would interpret A (i) as a direction.  Any 
substitutive changes would require a 24-hours review from Staff.  The 
Council also had the first two meetings in August to discuss the ballot 
measures. 
Council Member Cormack echoed the City Manager’s comment that the 
business community was concerned about the tax rate.  She believed the 
proposed $0.10 per square foot per month may be the largest area where 
change is required to satisfy oppositional parties.  She asked why the 
maker moved to delete economic development services. 
Council Member DuBois noted the tax was decreased and the City was 
exploring offsets and exemptions.  
Council Member Cormack understood Item C (ii) was advisory. 
Ms. Stump remarked Staff will provide language that provided more 
flexibility as opposed to an exact number per year. 
Page 32 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES  
Mayor Burt interjected the language was not intended to be in any given 
year. 
Ms. Stump supported it being in the aggregate. 
Council Member Cormack supported the ratio be considered overtime and 
not on an annual basis.  She agreed this was a challenging time for the 
United States of America and there was a risk of placing a Business Tax 
on the ballot given the softness of support that was identified in the polls. 
Council Member Tanaka proposed for Item C (ii) that the Business Tax be 
a Special Tax for affordable housing.  
Council Member DuBois answered no. 
Mayor Burt mentioned the polls indicated there was general support for a 
General Tax. 
Council Member Tanaka expressed disappointment and believed having a 
Special Tax would bridge the gap.  He suggested placing a cap on how 
much an individual business will pay. 
Council Member DuBois did not support establishing a cap. 
Mayor Burt stated a cap by nature was regressive. 
Council Member Tanaka suggested capping the increase for CPI. 
Council Member DuBois wanted to see more discussion about CPI and the 
rollover.  
Council Member Tanaka wanted to see a 20,000 square foot exemption. 
Council Member DuBois found 20,000 square feet to be too much.  
Vice Mayor Kou asked if the maker was open to having a $0.12 per square 
foot tax rate. 
Council Member DuBois felt the tax rate could be changed at the next 
hearing and he was open to either rate. 
Vice Mayor Kou acknowledged the letter from the public commenting that 
the City is required to build more housing in the near term.  The funds 
should be raised to build more affordable housing in the City.  
Page 33 of 33 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Action Minutes:  6/13/2022 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
Council Member DuBois commented if the City and the business 
community could not reach a consensus.  He supported increasing the tax 
rate to $0.12 per square foot. 
Mayor Burt agreed with Council Member DuBois. 
MOTION PASSED:  5-1-1, Tanaka no, Stone absent 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
None 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:54 P.M. 
