CITY COUNCIL 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 16 
Special Meeting 
 
December 5, 2022 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Cormack, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Present Remotely:  
DuBois 
Absent: 
 
 
None  
Mayor Patrick Burt Announced the public comment section for Closed Session 
would be ordered due to the high volume of speakers 
 
SPECIAL ORDER OF THE DAY  
AA1. Neighbors Abroad Presentation: Sister City Mayor Ando of Tsuchiura, 
Japan 
 
Jennifer Buenrostro flew to Tsuchiura in October for a discussion of middle 
school student exchange in the time of COVID. A video highlighting a recent 
fireworks display and a message from Mayor Ando was played. 
 
Mayor Burt invited public comment for Closed Session Item Number 1 before 
continuing to the Study Session.  
 
 
STUDY SESSION  
AA2. Study Session to Receive an Update on the Santa Clara County’s Effort 
to Update the Stanford Community Plan. 
Council Member Alison Cormack stated a Stanford affiliate was a source of 
income for her earlier in the year. Consultation with the City Attorney 
determined it was legally permissible for her to participate in the item but to 
avoid confusion and the appearance of impropriety, she recused herself. 
M-Group Principal Geoff Bradley presented on the updates to the Stanford 
Community Plan (SCP). The 1985 Land Use Policy Agreement was reviewed. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
Stanford submitted a General Use Permit application in 2016 that included a 
request to update the 2000 SCP and is referenced as the 2018 General Use 
Permit (GUP). The application was withdrawn by Stanford in 2019 but due to 
progress made by Staff, the Board directed Staff to continue updating the 
SCP, perform analysis regarding Stanford’s activities related to the provision 
of municipal services, and evaluate graduate student housing affordability 
and childcare. The findings of these studies were presented. 
Municipal services were found to be generally equivalent to those provided by 
the City across all services examined in the study but transparency of service 
delivery needs improvement. 
The Graduate Housing Affordability study found that Stanford provides 
housing for approximately 75 percent of graduate students and available 
units meet demand. About 85 percent of graduate housing is available at low 
or moderate-income levels. Students have difficulty with the cost of living in 
the area. 
The Childcare Study found on-campus childcare centers offer similar levels of 
service and cost as peer institutions but offer more childcare programs and 
spots. Cost for on-campus childcare was found to be higher than average. 
Students, faculty, and staff preferred more substantial childcare subsidies. 
Housing and Circulation Chapter Strategies were outlined. Policy and 
Implementation Measures were explained. Updates to Housing and 
Circulation Chapters work to increase housing supply while decreasing 
congestion. 
Other policy updates recommended by County Staff were described. The next 
meeting with the Board is on December 13. No final action will be taken but 
direction will be given to Staff and the consultant team. The SCP will be 
brought through formal adoption process in 2023. 
Mayor Burt stressed the importance of Palo Alto being included in the three-
party agreement. 
Vice Mayor Lydia Kou voiced concern over loss of property taxes and grade 
separation and asked if Stanford water accesses Palo Alto storm drains. Mr. 
Bradley said he would need to research that. Vice Mayor Kou asked about the 
No Net New Commute Trip (NNNCT). Morning traffic onto campus and 
afternoon traffic away from campus constitute commute traffic. Reverse 
commute is traffic going off campus in the morning and onto campus in the 
evening. Vice Mayor Kou asked that vehicle miles traveled (VMT) be further 
explored taking into account additional stops during an outing. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
Council Member DuBois asked how Stanford housing needs and production 
are considered for Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) purposes. Mr. 
Bradley said it was a complicated answer and he would have to research it. 
Council Member DuBois asked if there were impacts on Palo Alto services that 
were not accounted for. Mr. Bradley stated the study looked for gaps in 
services or inadequate service levels. It is possible there is a category of 
services where the services being provided by the City of Palo Alto, e.g., 
parks, are being used by Stanford-affiliated people. The study could not tease 
that out quantitatively. The study found the 3 parties should work together 
and monetary terms could be negotiated. Council Member DuBois said Staff 
and Council should think about things like children’s library services, parking 
enforcement, the cost of a residential parking permit program along the 
boundary with Stanford, and the accounting of wastewater and stormwater 
runoff. VMT and NNNCT should both be looked at. Council Member DuBois 
questioned if the Marguerite Shuttle could be expanded into the community. 
Council Member DuBois suggested Stanford make payments to the 
community in lieu of a property tax with payments being divided among 
agencies providing services. 
Council Member DuBois asked about the impact of a lack of a GUP and how 
much remaining build-out is permitted under the old GUP. Mr. Bradley said 
the GUP is used to measure out the allowable amount of academic 
development, e.g., the new buildings on campus. The GUP does not have an 
expiration date. When Stanford runs out of new development square footage, 
the Use Permit will still function. Development activity on campus could still 
occur if an existing building is taken down and replaced. 
Council Member Greer Stone asked if the County could enforce the 
implementation measure regarding not approving additional development 
permits until Stanford fully offsets any exceedance for new housing 
development under state law. Mr. Bradley said he would come back to the 
Council with an answer. 
Council Member Stone asked if the low on-campus demand for housing would 
be addressed in the implementation measures. Mr. Bradley said the focus is 
on net new development, academic space, and housing and not much can be 
done about past or existing deficiencies. If Stanford builds new academic 
space under a new GUP, that could be mitigated according to programs and 
policies. 
Council Member Stone noted Palo Alto houses the majority of Stanford faculty 
and postdocs and highlighted the impact Stanford has now and in the future 
on the City’s housing supply. He asked if the RHNA units to be placed on 
Stanford lands are for anticipated growth in the student and faculty 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
population. Mr. Bradley said no, that those units are coming from the ABAG 
designated housing targets. Stanford is not allowed to provide community 
housing on the academic campus core. There could be a provision for 
community housing on the nonacademic property if there is an excess of 
housing. 
Mayor Burt said the City is concerned that Stanford not be allowed to use trip 
reductions in the Stanford Research Park as a mitigation for on-campus trips.  
Concern was raised over the housing of Stanford service workers. Extending 
the Marguerite service into East Palo Alto would provide public transportation 
from East Palo Alto to campus as well as benefit Palo Alto traffic mitigations 
and address Stanford’s NNNCT requirement. A potential continuous bike 
route could run parallel to El Camino from the edge of Menlo Park to the 
south edge of Palo Alto and serve middle and high school students traveling 
from the Stanford campus. The City has identified the Stanford Research Park 
area as a critical opportunity for housing growth to meet Palo Alto housing 
needs. It would be a real loss to Palo Alto if Stanford used that for company 
housing. Mayor Burt urged the need for a comprehensive plan between the 
City and Stanford on housing and biotech development in the Research Park. 
Mayor Burt asked if Stanford was in compliance with state accessory dwelling 
unit (ADU) law. Mr. Bradley replied yes, but added he could come back to the 
Council with a proper legal analysis. Mr. Bradley said Stanford has amended 
their policy to allow ADUs. 
Vice Mayor Kou commented on people parking in Menlo Park and then 
transiting to campus. She emphasized MacArthur Park is a historical site. She 
agreed Marguerite services need to be expanded. Reasons for not living on 
campus according to the survey included housing priority being given to the 
degree program and off-campus housing being cheaper. Housing should be 
built before academic space. Stanford should work with the Safe Route to 
School team to ensure safe routes for school children. Stanford should pay 
for crossing guards to ensure safety. 
Mayor Burt said a grade separation report on July 14, 2022, included that 
Stanford must contribute to major regional transportation improvements like 
separating Caltrain at grade separation locations. Mr. Bradley said he would 
research that. 
Mayor Burt asked if flood protection was perceived as a municipal service in 
the SCP, specifically flooding from San Francisquito Creek where impacts are 
primarily downstream of university property. The Stanford watershed feeds 
into San Francisquito Creek and includes increased runoff. Mayor Burt asked 
if the upstream detention is part of Stanford’s obligation under municipal 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
services. Mr. Bradley said the county has adopted a lot of what the San 
Francisquito Creek Joint Powers Authority (JPA) told them within the legal 
framework the county is operating in to try to address the serious flooding 
issues. 
Public Comment 
1. Peter Drekmeier wanted special consideration to be paid to funding for 
the Palo Alto Unified School District. Stanford’s reservoirs in the San 
Francisquito Creek watershed are used for landscape irrigation and do 
not impact the creek but water from impervious surfaces runs into the 
creek. Upstream detention is important. 
2. Rebecca Eisenberg wished to have seen a response to the letter written 
by the mayor. She supported expansion of the Marguerite Shuttle. Palo 
Alto cut electric-powered shuttles at the beginning of the pandemic 
which resulted in community hardship and increased single-occupancy 
car usage and carbon output. She agreed with Stanford paying for bike 
and pedestrian bridges. She agreed Stanford should pay mitigations in 
lieu of property tax. 
 
CLOSED SESSION 
1. CONFERENCE 
WITH 
LABOR 
NEGOTIATORS 
 
City 
Designated 
Representatives: City Manager and his Designees Pursuant to Merit 
System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada, Kiely Nose, Sandra Blanch, 
Nicholas 
Raisch, 
Molly 
Stump, 
and 
Terence 
Howzell) 
Employee 
Organization: Service Employees International Union, (SEIU) Local 521, 
Utilities Management and Professional Association of Palo Alto (UMPAPA), 
Palo 
Alto 
Peace 
Officer’s 
Association 
(PAPOA), 
Palo 
Alto 
Police 
Management Association (PMA), International Association of Fire Fighters 
(IAFF) local 1319, Palo Alto Fire Chiefs Association (FCA),  ; Authority: 
Government Code Section 54957.6 (a) 
Public Comment  
1. Nate McClure, a park ranger for the City of Palo Alto, was happy with 
the progress thus far but stated changes need to be made to make 
everything more equal. 
2. Chris Brickner, a substation technician lead for the City of Palo Alto, 
said the workload has increased as the work force shrinks. The loss of 
work force needs to be stopped. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
3. David Sigua, who works for the library, expressed his love for Palo Alto. 
He 
voiced 
concern 
about 
attracting 
and 
retaining 
employees. 
Competitive compensation, cost-of-living adjustments, and continued 
healthcare coverage should be offered comparable to other cities in the 
area. 
4. Ratu Serumalani declined to speak and offered his time to Lynn Krug. 
5. Lynn Krug, chapter chair of the SEUI employees and Utilities water, 
gas, & wastewater inspector of 22 years, said there are too many 
employee vacancies and professionals are needed across the City. 
Competitive wages should be provided along with a cost-of-living 
adjustment (COLA) to retain employees as well as attract qualified and 
experienced employees to provide the level of services the City 
demands. 
MOTION:  Council Member Eric Filseth moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to go 
into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 6:42 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 9:00 P.M. 
Mayor Burt announced there were no reportable items.   
 
AGENDA CHANGES, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS 
Item Number 10 was continued to a future date. 
 
PUBLIC COMMENT 
1. Rani Fischer, the environmental advocacy assistant for the Santa Clara 
Valley Audubon Society, urged the Council to uphold the Parks and 
Recreation Commission recommendations to prohibit all electric 
bicycles on unpaved trails in Palo Alto’s nature preserves. 
2. Antonia Minion, a junior at Gunn and member of the Palo Alto Student 
Climate Coalition, said a lot needs to be accomplished to meet the 80 
by ’30 goal and urged continuation of electrifying appliances and 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
vehicles with renters being included. Residents should be made aware 
of opportunities and incentives. 
 
CONSENT CALENDAR 
Council Members Cormack and DuBois registered a no vote on Item Number 
2. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Numbers 3, 5. 
Mayor Burt invited the public to speak on the consent calendar. There were 
no requests to speak. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Burt to approve Agenda Item Numbers 2-6. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR PURPOSE OF VOTING:  
ITEMS 2 OF MOTION PASSED:  5-2, Cormack, DuBois 
ITEMS 3, 5 OF MOTION PASSED:  6-1 Tanaka No 
ITEMS 4,6 OF MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
2. 
Adoption of Resolution 10085 Authorizing Use of Teleconferencing for 
Council Meetings During Covid-19 State of Emergency 
3. 
Approval of a Professional Services Agreement with CLEAResult, Inc., for 
Residential Energy Efficiency and Electrification Advising, Rebate 
Processing and Optional Heat Pump Water Heater Pilot Program 
Administration for a Total Not-to-Exceed Amount of $2,940,400 for a 4-
Year Term Through December 2026 
4. 
Approve Contract C23185850 With Thomas Sarsfield for a Not-To- 
Exceed Amount of $395,000 for a Term of Three Years to Provide a 
Tennis Recreation Program 
5. 
Approval of the Acceptance of State of California Citizens Options for 
Public Safety (COPS) Funds of $172,000 and a Budget Amendment in the 
Supplemental Law Enforcement Services Fund (2/3 vote required) 
6. 
Approval of the Office of the City Auditor's Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 Task 
Orders 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
7. 
Adoption of a Resolution Declaring Weeds to be a Public Nuisance and 
Setting February 27, 2023 for a Public Hearing for Objections to the 
Proposed Weed Abatement Action: Continued to 12/19/22 
Council Member Greg Tanaka spoke on Item Number 5. He was okay with 
accepting state funds but there should be more discussion regarding tasers. 
 
CITY MANAGER COMMENTS  
 
Wastewater collection data indicated a spike in COVID presence. The County 
Health Department recommended vaccination. Only 25 percent of the county 
population have received the bivalent booster. 
Residents were encouraged to shop in person at town shopping districts. 
There will be increased visibility of the Palo Alto Police Department. Avoid 
being an attractive target of crime by not leaving purchases in vehicles. Enter 
a nearby store and ask them to call the police if feeling uncomfortable while 
shopping. 
House fires in the winter account for 30 percent of all fire deaths and 23 
percent of fire injuries. Holiday fire safety tips from The Palo Alto Fire 
Department can be found at bit.ly/PAFDholidayfiresafety. 
The Children’s Theater will present The Nutcracker through December 18. 
Details on the holiday decorating contest and toy drive can be found on the 
calendar on the City homepage. 
Repair work will be occurring in the upcoming days at the Caltrain railroad 
bridge over Oregon Expressway as well as electrification work at the Alma 
Avenue train crossing. Closures of several minutes can be expected related to 
electrification testing. The Caltrain website has been updated with specific 
contacts should issues arise. 
City Council will be discussing the Palo Alto fiber project in the next 2 weeks. 
Information is available on the City homepage. 
In the next week, City Council will be discussing some changes to the 
ordinance related to ADUs and JADUs, the response to the Grand Jury Report 
related to ballot measures, and a colleagues memo related to short-term 
rentals. On December 19, the Council will discuss Fiber to the Premises 
follow-up report and pending review and recommendation from the Policy 
and Services Committee and updates to the Procedures and Protocols 
Handbook. There will be no meeting on January 2 or 16. On January 9, the 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
City Council will have a reorganization meeting with selection of mayor and 
vice mayor. There will be a business meeting on January 23 where the long-
range financial forecast will be discussed. January 28 is the date of the City 
Council Retreat and priority-setting session. 
 
ACTION ITEMS 
8. 
Approval of a Construction Contract With Anderson Pacific Engineering 
Construction (APEC) in the Total Amount of $161,846,500; Approval of 
Three Amendments to Existing Agreements with: 1) Stanford University, 
2) East Palo Alto Sanitary District, and 3) Mountain View and Los Altos; 
Approval of Amendment #2 to Contract Number C19171565 with Brown 
& Caldwell  to Add Services, to Increase Compensation by $1,484,689 
for a New Maximum Compensation Not-to-Exceed $5,908,791, and to 
Extend the Contract Term through March 31, 2028; Approval of 
Amendment #2 to Contract Number C21176592C with Carollo Engineers 
to Add Construction Management Services, to Increase Compensation by 
$8,237,021; approval of a resolution to increase Clean Water State 
Revolving Fund financing to $193,000,000; approval of a budget 
appropriation increasing revenue and expenses; and approval of an 
exception to Debt Policy 1-65 for the Secondary Treatment Upgrades 
Project (WQ-19001) at the Regional Water Quality Control Plant.  
Water Quality Control Plant Manager James Allen presented an overview of 
the project. The Finance Committee unanimously recommended approval. 
Upon City Council approval, construction would begin in early 2023 with 
completion 58 months later. The first debt payment would be in November 
2028. Anderson Pacific provided the lowest bid. Total project costs and 
financing were outlined. Cash flow may be an issue during construction, and 
the City Council and the Finance Committee may be approached with options 
needing approval. 
Public Comment 
1. Lynn Chiapella asked if the contracts were limited to the amount 
being discussed or if there was a percentage where they may exceed 
the contract. She also asked if the rate increase to the public has 
been worked out. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the 58-month construction timeline was 
realistic or optimistic. Plant Manager Allen said it was a realistic timeline. 
Council Member Cormack asked for a ballpark figure on rates and if payments 
would begin in FY 2029. Plant Manager Allen said the Utilities Department 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
presented different rate scenarios to the Finance Committee. There would be 
a $2 to $4 per month increase in the coming years for single-family 
residential. Council Member Cormack asked how much Staff time it would 
take to oversee the project. Director Eggleston said Woodard & Curran helps 
to augment staff but he admitted it is difficult to keep up with these projects 
along with the smaller-scale capital maintenance at the plant. Discussions are 
being had about additional staff resources that may be needed. 
Council Member Tanaka asked where the nitrogen goes with this process. 
Plant Manager Allen explained it goes from urea to ammonia to nitrate. 
Nitrate is not treated and goes to the Bay. In the Bay, it is converted to 
nitrogen gas, some to nitrogen oxide. The treatment plant will bring it into 
the plant and convert it to nitrogen gas inside the tanks. Seventy-eight 
percent of the air we breathe is nitrogen. Council Member Tanaka referenced 
slide 17. Plant Manager Allen stated the costs capture consultant and 
contractor costs but not Staff costs which is an operating cost billed yearly. 
Council Member Tanaka referenced packet page 225 and the partners’ 
contributing share of the wastewater operating budget. He asked why Palo 
Alto goes from a high of 40 percent down to 32 percent in 2022. Director 
Eggleston stated the flow has decreased. Council Member Tanaka asked for 
the justification for Palo Alto continuing to pay the same amount while other 
cities should be paying more as their populations have increased. Director 
Eggleston stated this was discussed during Finance Committee review as 
well. All the partners have to agree to changes to the agreement. There is no 
updated information about longer-term expectations. An update to the long-
range facilities plan is expected that may lead to more discussion about the 
percentages. Council Member Tanaka emphasized renegotiating for a lower 
share of the cost to reflect Palo Alto’s lower usage now and not later. City 
Manager Shikada stated renegotiations are not feasible at this time. He 
added if they were to renegotiate the existing agreement, they would need to 
rebid and they would lose the time necessary to redo the entire procurement 
process with very little expectation that the partners have an incentive to 
reach that agreement. There are practical limitations as bids have been 
procured and they are ready to proceed after a multi-year effort. Council 
Member Tanaka would like to renegotiate with the partner cities before 
moving forward due to the overpayment of nearly $12M. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if the contracts have been voted on by the partner 
cities, which was confirmed by Director Eggleston. 
Mayor Burt referenced packet pages 226 and 227 comparing residential and 
non-residential rates versus other cities. Palo Alto is 28 percent below 
comparison cities. Mayor Burt asked if maintenance costs are higher with 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
stretching out the life of equipment. Plant Manager Allen stated parts for 
older equipment are not readily available and cost more. Mayor Burt asked 
what the time frame for renegotiating with the partners would be based on 
trends in the near future. Director Eggleston said they were about 2 years 
out with updating the long-range facility plan. 
In response to public comment, Mayor Burt stated the bid amount is $161M+ 
and authorization is not to exceed $178M and for Item 6, there is a 
reasonably expected maximum principal amount of $193M including the 
design. Mayor Burt asked for clarification of the competing amounts. Director 
Eggleston referenced slide 13 and explained the $193M includes all the costs. 
Mayor Burt asked if using 5 of the 10 acres designated for future 
environmental technologies would help the timeline and efficiency of the 
rebuild during construction. Director Eggleston was not sure it would impact 
the timeline to have more staging area but it would help with efficiency for 
this project and with concurrent projects. 
Council Member Tanaka asked over how many the years the debt would be 
paid. Director Eggleston said the debt is over 30 years, but the service 
payments do not begin until 2028. Council Member Tanaka asked if land 
valuation is factored in. Plant Manager Allen said the Wastewater Treatment 
Fund paid for all the property, which is owned by Palo Alto, and the partners 
paid their share of the property to buy it. 
Council Member Tanaka said the amount the City pays should change 
according to usage. Director Eggleston said both capital costs of construction 
and operating costs based on flow were considered when the agreements 
were created. 
MOTION Council Member Tanaka moved that the Council approve the staff 
recommendation with the addition of renegotiation of cost with other 
program partners.  
Motion died for lack of a second. 
Council Member DuBois asked about the life span of the equipment. Plant 
Manager Allen said  mechanical and electrical equipment typically last 30 
years and structural equipment lasts 50 years. Concrete would be reused and 
recoated. 
Council Member DuBois asked if the interest rate was still at 0.8 percent, 
which was confirmed. He asked if the rate would change if the project was 
disturbed in some way. Plant Manager Allen said if there was a long delay, 
the State would re-execute the contract, do a new credit review, and the 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
interest rate could be lost. The interest rate would be held for a re-bid 
situation. 
Council Member DuBois asked what steps were being taken to manage 
supply chain disruptions. Tom Kapushinski said there were struggles getting 
suppliers to hold prices for 30 days and even for 1 day. Council Member 
DuBois asked if Carollo Partners helps manage this. Plant Manager Allen said 
they are not under contract yet to do this work but work will begin upon 
approval. 
Mayor Burt asked what Mountain View’s current flow was. Director Eggleston 
said their current flow was a little over 6 million gallons per day. Each 
partner’s maximum flow far exceeds current flow, and Mayor Burt asked how 
that worked. Plant Manager Allen said flows were set in 1985 when flows 
were more of an issue. The flows add up to the regulated capacity of the 
plant according to industry standard and is how California regulates the 
capacity of the flow. The partners each have a share of the flow capacity that 
matches the design capacity of the plant. With flow conservation, no one will 
exceed their individual flow capacity limits. Director Eggleston added that 
current flows are dry-weather flows and flow was dramatically higher during 
wet weather. Mayor Burt asked what drove flow variation based on weather. 
Director Eggleston explained it was inflow and infiltration of rain water and 
ground water into the sewer system. 
Mayor Burt stated reexamining the proportioned allocations was important 
and it should be moved forward. Operating and capital costs should be 
reexamined to make sure they stay proportionate. 
MOTION:  Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to:  
1. 
Approve and authorize the City Manager or their designee to execute the 
construction contract with Anderson Pacific Engineering Construction, 
Inc., in the amount of $161,846,500 for the Secondary Treatment 
Upgrades project, funded in Wastewater Treatment Enterprise Fund 
Capital Improvement Program project WQ-19001, at the Regional Water 
Quality Control Plant; 
 
2. 
Authorize the City Manager or their designee to execute one or more 
change orders to the contract with APEC for related, additional but 
unforeseen work that may develop during the project, the total value of 
which shall not exceed $16,184,650 or 10% of the contract amount, for 
a total not-to-exceed amount of $178,031,150; 
 
3. 
Approve Amendment No. 8 to the agreement between Palo Alto and 
Stanford University; Addendum No. 1 to the Agreement between Palo 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
Alto and the East Palo Alto Sanitary District; and Addendum No. 11 to 
the agreement among Palo Alto, Mountain View, and Los Altos; 
 
4. 
Approve and authorize the City Manager or their designee to execute 
Amendment No. 2 to Contract No. C19171565 with Brown and Caldwell 
to increase the contract amount by $1,484,689 to provide design 
engineering services beyond the original scope of the contract for the 
design of the STU Project (CIP WQ-19001), and to extend the term 
through March 31, 2028. The revised total contract amount is not to 
exceed $5,908,791 including $5,371,628 for basic services and $537,163 
for additional services; 
 
5. 
Approve and authorize the City Manager or their designee to execute 
Amendment No. 2 to Contract No. C21176592C with Carollo Engineers to 
increase the contract amount by $8,237,021 to provide construction 
management and inspection services during construction for the STU 
Project (CIP WQ-19001). The revised total contract amount is not to 
exceed $8,841,268 including $8,037,516 for basic services and $803,752 
for additional services; 
 
6. 
Approve a resolution amending Resolution 9945 to increase the 
reasonably 
expected 
maximum 
principal 
amount 
of 
funding 
to 
$193,000,000 for design and construction of the Secondary Treatment 
Upgrades (CIP WQ-19001) and authorizing reimbursement of such 
funding 
from 
the 
Clean 
Water 
State 
Revolving 
Fund 
(SRF); 
 
7. 
Approve an amendment to the Fiscal Year 2023 Budget Appropriation for 
the Wastewater Treatment Fund (requires a 2/3 majority vote) by: 
a) Increasing revenue from Other Agencies estimate from a State 
Revolving Fund Loan by $44,200,400 
b) Increasing the Secondary Treatment Upgrades Capital Improvement 
Program project (WQ-19001) appropriation by $44,200,400; and 
 
8. 
Authorize an exception to City Policy and Procedures Debt Policy 1-65 
Guideline V.A.6 to allow the Wastewater Treatment Enterprise Fund to 
use a debt limit exceeding 15 percent of annual Wastewater Treatment 
Enterprise Fund operating expenses. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka No 
9. 
PUBLIC HEARING / QUASI-JUDICIAL. 1700 Embarcadero Road [21PLN-
00191]: Consideration of a Site and Design Review, Design Enhance 
Exception, Variance and Off-Street Loading Space Modification to Allow 
the Demolition of a Vacant Restaurant and the Construction of a new 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
two-Story 31,000 Square Foot Automobile Dealership. The PTC and the 
ARB Recommend Approval of the Project. Environmental Assessment: 
Addendum to a Mitigated Negative Declaration. Zoning District: 
CS(D)(AD) Service Commercial (Site & Design Review / Automobile 
Dealership Combining Districts). (9:30 – 10:30 PM) 
Planning & Development Services Principal Planner Sheldon Ah-Sing 
presented an overview of the project. Key issues included Baylands Master 
Plan compliance, the bicycle pathway, parking lot shading, build-to setbacks, 
and required on-site loading spaces. Resolutions were found for all issues. 
The Planning & Transportation Commission (PTC) recommended approval 
with the elimination of Condition of Approval #14 and Condition of Approval 
#22 if deemed unnecessary and provided flexibility to Condition of Approval 
#34. The Architectural Review Board (ARB) recommended approval adding 
for Condition of Approval #16, to come back to the ARB Ad Hoc with more 
detail on plantings, architectural material confirmation, and cross section for 
the multi-use path. The ARB and PTC recommended that the City Council 
adopt the Record of Land Use Action approving the new car dealership and 
request for a Site and Design Variance and Design Enhancement Exception 
based on the findings and subject to the conditions of approval. 
ARB Chair David Hirsch described the ARB’s impressions of the project and 
their request for more detail for the bike path, additional plantings between 
the trees, and additional trees on the fingers of land in the parking lot. 
Applicant Eric Iversen, Director of Real Estate for Swickard Automotive, 
presented an overview of the project. He noted the use of reclaimed wood, a 
green wall, and future solar panels. The dealership would be selling e-bikes, 
electric vehicles, and a plug-in hybrid. 
Public Comment 
1. Rebecca Eisenberg voiced concern regarding sustainability goals and 
commitment to environmental protection. The harm from high-polluting 
projects on the other side of Embarcadero falls on East Palo Alto 
residents and the Baylands Natural Preserve. The toxic consequences of 
car dealerships include toxic seeps into the land that deem it 
uninhabitable. 
2. Aaron Hadzess, a field representative with the Carpenters Local Union 
405 in Santa Clara County, strongly encouraged use of a responsible 
developer for the project that supports affordable healthcare, provides 
a living wage, and uses an apprenticeship program. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
3. Lynn Chiapella voiced concern over removal of trees and questioned 
how many large trees would be planted. She recommended the Council 
specify a certain percentage of trees must be 36” to 48”. She asked if it 
was possible to provide shading through solar panels. 
Council Member Cormack voiced support for the Staff recommendation. 
Council Member Stone asked about the ARB suggestion that a row of parking 
be removed to accommodate trees in the pathway. Mr. Iversen said a 
compromise was proposed to add native trees to the Baylands as getting the 
bike path was deemed more critical than preserving the trees. 
Council Member Stone asked what amount of sales tax could be expected 
from the project. Mr. Iversen stated the Audi store is at about $7.5M in sales 
tax and he predicted this Mercedes project would be double that annually. 
Council Member Stone approved of the use of bird-safe glass and asked 
about nighttime lighting to mitigate bird impacts. Principal Planner Ah-Sing 
said there were conditions to lower the light intensity after hours. Council 
Member Stone voiced support of the project. 
Council Member DuBois asked that the protected trees to be removed be 
highlighted in the Staff report and presentation. Principal Planner Ah-Sing 
stated one tree along Embarcadero met the criteria for a protected tree and 
would be removed for the bike path. Council Member DuBois voiced support 
of the project. 
Council Member Filseth said every iteration of the project has gotten better. 
Vice Mayor Kou voiced concern about tree removal and echoed public 
comment about size of replacement trees. Principal Planner Ah-Sing stated 
Bayland trees are 24” and would be in before issuance of the certificate of 
occupancy. Vice Mayor Kou asked if the tall black Mercedes wall could be 
decreased from 36 feet to 30 or 32 feet. Planning & Development Services 
Planning Director Jonathan Lait said the wall is designed to be seen. It was 
reviewed by the ARB and endorsed. Mr. Iversen said the black wall is a 
Mercedes element and they were given the proportions. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked about the loading zones. Mr. Iversen said these are 
used for package delivery. No car carriers would come onto the site. Vice 
Mayor Kou asked where vehicle inventory would located. Mr. Iversen said 
inventory sites are leased monthly or every 6 or 12 months and are usually 
within 3 to 5 miles. As a condition of approval, vehicle unloading cannot be 
done in the right-of-way. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 16 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  12/05/2022 
Mayor Burt asked why solar arrays would not be installed during 
construction. Mr. Iversen said solar arrays were a discussion item at the ARB 
with some members in favor and some questioning if canopies were the right 
solution and he didn’t want that to hold up the project. Mayor Burt said the 
symbolism of solar panels in that location would be beneficial along with the 
solar power and shading they would provide. 
MOTION:  Council Member Tanaka moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to Adopt the Record of Land Use Action approving a new car 
dealership and requests for a Site and Design, Variance, and Design 
Enhancement Exception based on findings and subject to the conditions of 
approval contained in Attachment B. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
10. Staff and the Council Sustainability and Climate Action (S/CAP) Ad Hoc 
Committee Recommend That Council Review and Provide Feedback to 
Staff on the Draft 2023-2025 S/CAP Work Plan and Direction on 
Governance of the Work Plan  
ACTION: This item was continued to a future meeting.  
 
COUNCIL MEMBER QUESTIONS, COMMENTS AND ANNOUNCEMENTS 
None. 
 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:08 P.M. 
