CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 28
Special Meeting
February 14, 2022
The City Council
of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council
Chambers and by virtual teleconference
at 5: 00 P.M. 
Present: 
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka
Absent: 
None
Special Orders of the Day
1. 
Select Applicants to Interview for the Architectural
Review Board. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Kou to
interview all new applicants for the Architectural Review Board. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
Public Comment
None
AA1.  Friends of the Palo Alto Libraries. 
Friends of the Palo Alto Libraries ( FPAL) President Jenny Monroe shared that
FPAL was established in 1938. The goal of FPAL was to maintain a group of
people interested in enriching and publicizing resources for the library as well
as support library activities in the interest of the community.  The first annual
book sale was held in 1969 and has since changed into monthly book sales.  
The gross sale total from the sales of books in the year 2000 exceeded
100, 000. In 2002, FPAL moved to Cubberley
and began using online book
sales platforms. The gross sale total for 2018/ 2019 was $ 356,000, of which
86,000 were high- value sales.  During the year 2019/ 2022, when the Covid-
19 Pandemic hit, sales totaled $ 274, 000, of which $ 96,000 was from high-
value items.  In years 2020/ 2021, the gross sales from books sales was
252,000, of which over $ 100,000 were from high- value sales.  Friends and
family sales were implemented
in the year 2020.  Those sales along with
online book sales and high values sales kept FPAL afloat during the Covid- 19
pandemic. FPAL managed approximately
85,000 books with over 100 active
volunteers.  After a monthly sale, any books remaining in the bargain room
are offered free to teachers and non- profits and then to the general public.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
FPAL continued to make annual grants to the library and pays $ 25,000 to the
City of Palo Alto in rent. 
Mayor Burt thanked all the members of FPAL for the donation of their time
and support.  
NO ACTION TAKEN
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
None
Public Comment
Winter Dellenbach remarked that a protected tree near the downtown post
office was almost cut down.  She was concerned that the City’s Urban Forester
was not aware that the tree was proposed to be cut down.  A resident was
made aware of the removal and stopped it. She wanted to understand how
the City works with the federal government
to protect
and take care of
protected trees located on federal land. 
Deborah Simon, Chair of Friends of Cubberley, stated that the Friends are
exhausted from waiting for action from Council and Palo Alto Unified School
District.  She urged Council to included Cubberley in the City’s Infrastructure
Plan and act now on making repairs for the Center. 
Aram James mentioned that there are no people of color on the Palo Alto police
force.  He believed it was appropriate for the entire City Council to refute and
commend the racial statements
that were made at the prior City Council
meeting.  He recommended that Council share the video of the meeting with
the District Attorney to decide if the comments were a terrorist threat. 
Alexander Stein stated that moving to Palo Alto was a huge regret because a
relationship
when south and he now cannot afford to live in the City.  He
recommended that the City work with Google to identify fraud persons through
BitCoin scandals.  
Liz Gardner announced
she resides at 2500 El Camino Real in the new low-
income complexes.  There have been unlivable conditions for residents at the
complex.  She requested Council allow the recreation scholarship program to
be increased to 80 percent for low- income folks.  She wanted to know what
the City spent the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ( CARES) 
Act funds on and if there are still funds available.  Also, she wanted to know
if those funds could be used for affordable housing or recreational services for
low- income persons and youth.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Mayor Burt invited Ms. Gardner to email City Manager Shikada to address her
living condition concerns.  
Consent Calendar
Vice Mayor Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Stone, third by Mayor
Burt to pull Item 5 from the Consent Calendar to be heard as Item 8A tonight.  
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Numbers 6, 7. 
Elizabeth
Alexis supported
the Council Members
who recommended
pulling
the AECOM contract from the Consent Calendar. She felt that the next step
for Charleston Avenue was not to keep working in the same direction but do
a design that meets community
concerns.  
She recommended
that Council
support any efforts made by Caltran for grade separations. 
MOTION:  
Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member
Cormack to approve the Consent Agenda items 2-4, 6-7. 
2. 
Approve Minutes from the January 31, 2022 City Council Meeting. 
3. 
Approval
of Construction
Contract
Number
C22181645
with
Legion
Contractors Inc., in the Amount of $494,723, and Authorization for the
City Manager or their Designee to Negotiate and Execute Change Orders
up to a Not- to-Exceed
Amount
of $ 74,208, for the Magical
Bridge
Playground Rubber and Synthetic Turf Resurfacing Capital Improvement
Program Project ( PE- 21003). 
4. 
Approval of Amendment
Number 2 to the Agreement
With Palo Alto
Unified School District ( PAUSD) for PAUSD Athletic Field Brokering and
Maintenance
Cost- sharing to Extend the Term to June 30, 2022 with an
Optional Extension for an Additional Two Years. 
5. 
Approval of Amendment # 4 to Contract C18171057
with AECOM to
Increase the Not- to-Exceed Compensation
by $ 722,170 for Additional
Evaluation and Outreach of Railroad Grade Separation Alternatives
for
a Total Not- to-Exceed of $ 3,596, 828. This Item was pulled and heard
as Item 8A. 
6. 
Approval
of
Meter
Data
Management
System (
MDMS) 
Contract
C22184319 With N. Harris Corporation ( SmartWorks) in the Amount Not
to Exceed $ 1,804, 055 Over a Five- Year Term. 
7. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of Ordinance 5543 Amending Palo Alto
Municipal
Code
Section
9.68 ( Relocation
Assistance
for
No- Fault
Evictions) by Reducing the Threshold for Applicability from 50 Units to
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
10 Units or a Lower Threshold. Environmental
Assessment: 
Exempt
pursuant to CEQA Guidelines
Section 15061( b)( 3). ( FIRST READING: 
January 31, 2022 PASSED: 5-1-1, Tanaka no, Stone abstain). 
ITEMS 2 AS AMENDED, 3, 4, OF MOTION PASSED:  7-0
ITEM 6 OF MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka No
ITEM 7 OF MOTION PASSED: 5-1-1, Tanaka No, Stone Recused
ITEM 5 was pulled from the Consent Calendar to be heard as Item 8A. 
Council Member Tanaka commented
while he supports automatic metering
infrastructure ( AMI), the bid was on the higher end and had a $ 250, 000
termination penalty.  There was no rationale why there was a high termination
penalty.  Regarding Item 7, his no vote was to be consistent with his prior
votes. 
City Manager Comments
City Manager Ed Shikada announced that the Mask Mandate will continue for
Santa
Clara
County
until
there
is an 80
percent
vaccination
rate, low
hospitalizations, and a 7-day average of new cases per day or below 550 cases
per week for at least a week. The U.S Food and Drug Administration
has
delayed the Covid- 19 vaccination for kids 6-months to 5-years old.  The City’ s
library' s service hours will be restored to pre- omicron service hours and free
community Covid- 19 testing continued.  Upcoming events included the kick-
off celebration for Neighbors Abroad and Sibling Cities on February 15, 2022.   
The next Housing Element Update Ad Hoc Committee meeting was scheduled
for February 17, 2022, Palo Alto Fiber conversation was to be held on February
24, 2022, Objective Standards community meeting on March 22, 2022, and a
Fiscal Sustainability
conversation
on March 29, 2022.  The Art Center was
holding a virtual meditation session on February 17, 2022.  There will be a
Palo Alto author event on February 23, 2022, a Palo Alto Junior Museum and
Zoo
event
on February
27, 2022, emergency
preparedness
training
on
February
19, 2022, and Community
Emergency
Response
Team ( CERT) 
training on March 7, 2022.  For the February 28, 2022 City Council meeting, 
Council will discuss weed abatement, the civil grand jury response on housing, 
and the street closures for California Avenue and Ramona Street.  
Mayor Burt announced that Santa Clara County has exceeded the required 80
percent vaccination rate with 84 percent of the entire county being vaccinated.  
8A. 
Approval of Amendment # 4 to Contract C18171057
with AECOM to
Increase the Not- to-Exceed Compensation
by $ 722, 170 for Additional
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Evaluation and Outreach of Railroad Grade Separation Alternatives
for
a Total Not- to-Exceed of $3,596, 828. 
Liz supported grade separations, but only in the way the City wants to do it. 
She stated it's critical to make the connections with transit to mitigate climate
change and sea- level rise. She urged the City to move forward quickly with
the project. 
MOTION: Vice Mayor Kou moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to refer this item
to the Rail Committee.  
Vice Mayor Kou wanted to see more discussions regarding four tracks.  She
acknowledged
the concern about a consultant hiring a consultant to do the
work and then doing a peer review.  
Mayor Burt mentioned many of the elements that are to be evaluated next will
follow greater clarity from Caltrain regarding four- tracks.  He agreed Council
did not ask for a peer review in their previous motion.  Council requested a
second evaluation and study of the trench option by another party.  
Council Member Cormack asked how much will the action delay work for grade
separation.  
Chief Transportation
Official Philip Kamhi could not answer the question due
to there being no Rail Committee meeting scheduled.  He noted that the Rail
Committee cannot authorize a contract and so the item would have to come
back to Council.  
Council Member Cormack wanted to know how often the Rail Committee will
meet. 
Vice Mayor Kou answered Staff and herself are discussing it but shared she
would like the Committee to meet monthly.  
Council Member DuBois recalled that Council voted and passed a motion to
direct Staff to hire a consultant last year.  He wanted to see some of the work
in the item moved forward without delay and that the proposed motion was
very broad.  He inquired if the motion does not pass, was there funding
available for AECOM to support Rail Committee meetings.  
City Manager
Ed Shikada confirmed
that the first Rail Committee
meeting
would not have the support of AECOM.  Based on the recommendations
from
the Rail Committee, new negotiations
with AECOM may need to happen
regarding scope. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Council Member DuBois restated that seven of the items have already been
voted on and he did not want to see the work redone.  He asked if the scope
is to revisit the trench alternatives with the Rail Committee and then bring it
back to Council. 
Mayor Burt restated it was to look at the alignment of the scope of work with
the Work Plan and sequencing.  He agreed that the geotechnical
studies can
proceed soon.  
Council Member DuBois urged the Rail Committee not to overly delay or create
work that Council has already voted on.  He expressed concern about Council
being involved in a level of detail that Staff should be doing.  
Council Member Stone found the maker and seconder’ s arguments compelling. 
He supported the motion.  
PASSED:  4-3, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth no
Action Items
8. 
Discuss and Provide Direction to Staff on: ( 1) Continuing the
Cubberley Concept Plan; ( 2) the Temporary Relocation of Palo Verde
and Hoover Elementary Schools to Cubberley; and ( 3) Potential
Opportunity to Acquire Additional Land at Cubberley. 
Community Services Director Kristen O’Kane reported that Cubberley is a
35- acre site.  The City owns 8-acres and Palo Alto Unified School District
PAUSD) owns 27-acres. Historically, the City leased all of PAUSD’ s portion
of Cubberley and included the buildings and fields.  As part of the Fiscal Year
FY) 2021 Budget process, the amount of space leased by the City was
reduced.  The City leases the theatre, gym, pavilion, and athletic fields for
community use.  The Cubberley Concept Plan was completed in November
2019 after a community co- design process which the City and PAUSD jointly
funded.  A California Environmental
Quality Act ( CEQA) process began, but
due to delays, the document has not been completed.  PAUSD would like to
reserve 20-acres of space for a future school but currently, there was no
need for a school.  Also, PAUSD was no longer interested in moving their
administrative
offices to Cubberley or building housing on the site.  Staff was
seeking direction from Council on how to move forward.  If the CEQA
document work is continued, Staff would return to Council with a
recommendation to adopt the Cubberley Concept Plan as drafted and CEQA
document.  If Council directed Staff not to continue, the work will cease and
be used as a resource for future use.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Senior Management
Analyst Sarah Duffy provided an update on the school
relocations.  Through the academic years of 2022- 2023, 2023- 2024, and
2024- 2025 there will be two major construction projects that will occur at
Palo Verde Elementary and Hoover Elementary.  Students will be moved off-
campus and over to the Greendell School campus while the projects are
underway.  PAUSD held many community meetings, school meetings, and
public Board meetings regarding the projects.  The existing Greendell School
will hold grades kindergarten through 3rd grade.  Portable structures will be
placed in Greendell School’ s parking lot and will hold Grades 4 and 5, a
bathroom, administrative
offices and music/ art.  Adjacent parking lot areas
will be used for safe pedestrian parking and access. 
Transportation Director Philip Kami confirmed that the Office of
Transportation’ s top concern was making sure traffic circulation patterns and
student safety was addressed.  PAUSD has been working with the City and
the City School Traffic Safety Committee on the matter.  PAUSD will be
holding a bike audit of the route from Palo Verde Elementary to Greendell
Elementary as well as hold multiple bike to school trainings in the fall.  The
proposed redesign of Hoover Elementary will require changes to the current
street design at East Charleston Road, the entry and exit to the school and
also the Waverley Bike Path.  Hoover Elementary’ s redesign will be reviewed
multiple times by the Office of Transportation, the City School Traffic Safety
Committee and the Pedestrian and Bicycle Advisory Committee before the
designs are finalized. 
Ms. Duffy remarked that the City and PAUSD have reviewed the lease
agreement between the City and PAUSD.  Both parties have determined that
the relocation will not impact City- owned or leased sections of Cubberley and
no adjustments to the lease are needed.  Students, staff and families will be
utilizing common areas that are shared between PAUSD and the City.  
PAUSD will work with Palo Alto Utilities to establish electricity for the
portables and afterschool programs will be held in PAUSD rooms in
Cubberley.   Starting in March 2022, PAUSD will begin preparing Greendell
School to house Palo Verde Elementary.  Portables will be moved during
PAUSD spring break 2022 and teachers and staff will move to Greendell
School in the summer of 2022.  During the summer of 2023, Hoover
Elementary will move to the Greendell School. 
Council Member Filseth inquired if Staff has an indication of which 7-acres
may be available to the City. 
Ms. O’Kane answered not at this time.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Council Member Filseth asked if the work on the CEQA document can be
continued at a later time or would the entire document have to be done. 
Ms. O’Kane remarked that it was work that could be built upon later. 
Council Member DuBois wanted to know if there were any discussions about
the playing fields that are used as a shared resource.  
Ms. O’Kane confirmed the City owns the tennis courts.  There have not been
detailed discussions, but there was interest from PAUSD to continue the
current agreement.  
Council Member DuBois asked how much has the City paid in rent for the
Cubberley property.  
Ms. O’Kane mentioned she would provide the answer later.  
Council Member Stone understood that Staff was not seeking any input from
Council regarding the schools relocating to Greendell.  
Ms. O’Kane stated that is correct. 
Council Member Stone requested that Staff expand on PAUSD’ s interest in
acquiring the land in Ventura Neighborhood.  
Ms. O’Kane reported that the City identified City- owned land in the Ventura
Neighborhood that may be of interest to PAUSD as a point of discussion.  
When the City purchased the land from PAUSD, the agreement included
language that PAUSD has the First Right of Refusal to buy back the land. 
Council Member Stone recalled that the City in prior years offered PAUSD the
Ventura property, but the school had indicated that it was an inadequate
size.  
Ms. O’Kane agreed that both the buildings at Cubberley and in Ventura need
improvements
to house a school. 
Council Member Stone inquired if there are any other City- owned parcels
that PAUSD may be interested in.  
Ms. O’Kane shared there was a brief discussion about the property on Gang
Road, but that was determined later as not a feasible site.  
Council Member Cormack asked how much will it cost to continue with the
CEQA analysis.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Ms. O’Kane confirmed the CEQA analysis is completely funded at
approximately $ 150, 000. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to know if the Cubberley Concept Plan
never came to fruition, how useful would it be for the City to certify the plan.  
City Attorney Molly Stump clarified that if discretionary projects are not
approved immediately but time passes.  New impacts may occur because of
changed circumstances
and those will need to be studied further. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to know how Staff characterized the
quality of the current City- owned spaces a Cubberley.  
Ms. O’Kane agreed it was old, dated and needed improvement.  
Council Member Cormack indicated that Charleston Road and Arastradero
Road were currently under construction.  She requested that Staff explain
what the logistics will be when Palo Verde moves to Greendell.  
Mr. Kamhi confirmed Staff was coordinating with the Public Works
Department to make sure that there will be no impacts occurring at the
same time.  
City Manager Ed Shikada invited Mr. Kamhi to explain how the new traffic
signal will support the change in traffic patterns. 
Mr. Kamhi informed that the traffic signal on Montrose Avenue will be
installed before the relocation of Palo Verde Elementary. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to know if Staff has explored using a
shuttle.  
Mr. Kamhi remarked that was a question for PAUSD.  
Council Member Cormack asked if Council can act now to place Cubberley on
the City’ s Infrastructure
Plan.  
Ms. Stump answered no, but Council can direct Staff to come back with
more information. 
Mr. Shikada confirmed it would be an appropriate referral to Staff. 
Vice Mayor Kou understood the CEQA document would review the entire
Cubberley Concept Plan along with PAUSD’ s portion of the site.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Ms. O’Kane answered that is correct, but the future school was not included
in the analysis.  
Vice Mayor Kou challenged that the Cubberley Concept Plan does not include
housing.  
Ms. O’Kane clarified that the plan included housing at 525 San Antonio Road
and housing a Cubberley.  
Vice Mayor Kou declared the proposal no longer included housing, but the
CEQA document continued to evaluate it.  She wanted to know the pros and
cons of continuing to evaluate projects that are no longer being pursued.  
Ms. Stump stated the primary con would be that it was not a useful use of
time and funds.  If completed, a pro was that the CEQA document could be
used for any portion of the Cubberley Concept Plan in the future.  
Vice Mayor Kou asked if PAUSD contributed funds for the CEQA document.  
Ms. O’Kane answered PAUSD contributed $ 50,000.  The original agreement
was the CEQA consultant would not exceed $ 100, 000 and PAUSD would pay
half.  Staff returned to Council to amend the consultant’ s scope and Council
approved the exceeded amount that was covered fully by the City.  
Mayor Burt mentioned that the adult education program at Greendell would
be moved to PAUSD’ s portion of Cubberley.  He inquired if that move would
impact tenants who had to move from the City’ s portion of Cubbery to
PAUSD’ s.  
Eric Holm – Director of Facilities Palo Alto Unified School District confirmed
that the building was currently vacant.  
Mayor Burt inquired how much was currently in the fund for maintenance at
Cubberley.  
Ms. O’Kane answered that there was a roof replacement project happening
currently.  
Director of Public Works Brad Eggleston disclosed that he did not know the
current total.  Current and upcoming projects included roof replacements, 
turf and track maintenance, a new park restroom, parking lot improvements
and ongoing repairs. 
Mayor Burt requested that Staff acquire how much funding was in the
maintenance fund for Cubberley.  He asked if there have been discussions
with PAUSD about the City- owned Terman parkland. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Ms. O’Kane restated that Terman parkland is dedicated parkland and to
undedicated the land would require a vote of the people.  
Mayor Burt pressed how many acres are there. 
Ms. O’Kane reported 7.7-acres. 
Administrative Services Director Kiely Nose mentioned that the balance in
the Capital Infrastructure
Fund for Cubberley had $ 2.4 million in unallocated
funds.  
Ken Horowitz
stated
the relationship
between
PAUSD
and the City was
insanity.  He emphasized that it was time for a community center and that it
was irresponsible to buy an additional 7-acres.  He recommended that Council
pause
the
Cubberley
Concept
Plan, not
acquire
new
land, and
build
a
community center on the City- owned 8-acres.  
Phil Mast stated that was not a smart use of tax dollars if there are no longer
City and PAUSD shared facilities at Cubberley.  He supported an approach that
included a Concordia- like vision for the overall development
of the property, 
shared facilities and compensation
to PAUSD for the City’ s use of its land.  
Liz Gardner supported the City working with PAUSD in cooperation.  
She
commented
that the surface parking lot off of Middlefield
Road was unsafe
with loose concrete and potholes.  Also, the traffic on Middlefield
Road was
congested and dangerous for kids biking to and from school.  
Peter Giles stated that it was painful to watch Cubberley continually being
underutilized.  He stated this was a strategic and transformative opportunity
for the City of Palo Alto and urged Council to move forward with the Cubberley
Concept Plan.  
Penny Ellson spoke on behalf of herself and emphasized
that small, high
dense, housing structures need recreational space.  She wanted to know how
the intensified use of the combined schools will impact City streets and what
measures have been set in place to protect children walking and biking to and
from school.  She urged the City and PAUSD to work together.  
Mayor Burt invited PAUSD to share what the rationale was for not pursuing a
collaborative development with the City for Cubberley. 
Council
Member
DuBois
shared
that
the
Cubberley
Ad
Hoc
Committee
discussed the matter.  It was identified that the current Super Intendant of
PAUSD did not share the same vision of shared space as the previous Super
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Intendant.  The Ad Hoc Committee
recommended
a joint School Board and
City Council meeting to decide the next steps for Cubberley.  
Mayor Burt recalled that PAUSD articulated a position that the use of the area
as a school site was so far in advance that they would be investing in an
uncertain purpose.  
Council
Member
DuBois
answered
that was not how
PAUSD
stated
their
position.  There was a division between the two School Board Members who
were on the Ad Hoc Committee. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to do a shared space that worked for the
entire community but realized that the City should move forward alone at this
time.  She acknowledged
that the facility is dilapidated.  She did not support
moving forward with a CEQA document that reviewed projects that most likely
will not happen.  There was not enough space for the Cubberley Concept Plan
on the existing site and she advised the City to narrow down the items from
the plan.  Regarding the temporary
relocation of the schools, she expected
the
City
to
work
collaboratively
with
PAUSD
regarding
the
logistics.  
Concerning the land acquisition, she urged the City to pursue purchasing the
land.  
Council Member Filseth agreed with Council Member Cormack’ s remarks.  He
stated there has been no compelling
reason to continue work on the CEQA
document.  
He
supported
the
City
exploring
further
the
possibility
of
purchasing land from PAUSD.  
Council Member DuBois concurred with the previous Council Members.  
He
expressed disappointment in the wasted funds and time to draft the Cubberley
Concept plan only to have staffing changes who have different visions.  He
asked how much the City pays in rent for Cubberley.  
Ms. O’Kane
shared
before
renegotiations, 
the City paid $ 5.8 million
but
currently, the City paid $ 2.7 million in rent.  
Council Member DuBois acknowledged that the City has worked with PAUSD
collaboratively in the past.  He recommended that City Council and the School
Board hold a joint session.  He agreed the City should not pursue the CEQA
analysis
anymore.  
Regarding
the
temporary
schools, 
he
wanted
to
understand the impacts for the shared common spaces and whether the City
should request a rent reduction.  
Ms. Duffy indicated that there have been no discussions regarding rent. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Council Member DuBois believed that the City should explore purchasing the
land.  He mentioned because the City has supported PAUSD for many years, 
PAUSD should not expect market rate for the land.  He did not support using
Ventura as a land swap option.  He suggested using the maintenance fund for
Cubberley to buy the land over time.  
Council Member Tanaka articulated that the City and PAUSD have largely the
same tax base.   While normally he advocated for the best deal for the City. 
In this situation, he supported being more generous to PAUSD and helping
support their operations.  Regarding the land acquisition, he acknowledged
the City does not monetize City- owned land and so he did not want the City
to acquire the land just to acquire land.  He recommended
the City pause
work on the CEQA document until there is an agreement with PAUSD. 
Council Member Stone aligned his comments with Council Member Cormack.  
He was saddened to say that the City should move forward with the
Cubberley Concept Plan on its own and that the City should not continue
work on the CEQA document.   He found the land acquisition possibility
interesting but was concerned when the Staff report stated it would take
significant Staff resources to advance forward the opportunity.  He wanted a
commitment from PAUSD before the City begins the process of acquiring the
land.  He acknowledged
the frustration from residents regarding the lack of
community resources in South Palo Alto.   He asked if the 8-acres the City
currently has is enough space for a community center.  
Ms. O’Kane predicted it would fit a lot of the community’ s needs, but there
were concepts that Council would have to prioritize.  
Council Member Stone inquired if it was concrete that the acres labeled as
City- owned were in fact the City’s.  
Ms. O’Kane confirmed that the City’s 8-acres are clearly defined. 
Vice Mayor Kou aligned her comments with Council Member Cormack, Filseth
and Stone.  She inquired if the cardiac therapy program will remain under
the City’s purview.  
Ms. O’Kane explained that the program is housed on a PAUSD parcel but the
City leases the building from PAUSD. 
Vice Mayor Kou recommended when the City begins to explore the
development of the 8-acres, it includes the cardiac therapy program.  She
reminded Council that the organizations who use the land provide benefits to
the community because of the subsidized rent.   
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Mayor Burt agreed with Council Member DuBois that it would be productive
to have a joint meeting with PAUSD in the coming months.  He reminded
Council that if the funds are reallocated for land purchase, that would mean
further deterioration of Cubberley.  Regardless of PAUSD seeing a decrease
in enrollment and increase in the tax base.  The School District has two
structural surpluses and will be using them for school purposes.  He restated
that the City is limited by the amount of land it has at Cubberley.  The City
owns land at Fletcher Middle School which the City allows PAUSD to use as
playing fields and PAUSD has land that the City uses.  He was interested in
exploring those parcels. 
Council Member DuBois clarified his suggestion was to acquire the land now
but pay PAUSD over several years.  He restated his concern regarding
Ventura and how the loss of daycares in the vicinity may hurt the
community.  The Fletcher Middle School land proposal he found interesting
but was not strongly supportive of un- dedicating parkland.  He agreed with
Council Member Stone that there have to be ground rules set and a
commitment from PAUSD. 
MOTION: Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Council Member
Cormack to: 
A. 
Direct Staff to pause preparation of the Cubberley Concept Plan CEQA
document until there is a plan for development of a new community
center on the City- owned portion of Cubberley, 
B. 
Agendize a joint meeting with PAUSD School Board and City Council
C. 
Ask Staff to begin development of framework for the
Council Member DuBois predicted that the City cannot afford to purchase 7-
acres at market rates.  If there was a commitment from PAUSD to allow
community use of the facilities, the City may be able to make payments over
a period of time.  
Council Member Cormack recommended removing the second clause in Item
A of the motion. 
Council Member DuBois agreed. 
Council Member Cormack suggested additional language to Item C of the
motion.  
Council Member DuBois did not want to limit the motion to only exploring a
land swap.  He felt it was premature to begin the design of a Cubberley
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Community Center and recommended
that the design begin once the City
has acquired the land. 
MOTION RESTATED: Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Council
Member Cormack to: 
A. 
Direct Staff to pause preparation of the Cubberley Concept Plan CEQA
B. 
Agendize a joint meeting with PAUSD School Board and City Council
C. 
Ask Staff to return to Council with a work plan to include: 
i. 
Exploring a land swap at Fletcher or financial framework for
purchasing available land
ii. 
To Include scoping the design process for Cubberley Community
Center that is City owned.  
Mr. Shikada concurred Staff cannot scope a design process without knowing
how much land there is.  
Council Member Cormack withdrew Item C(i) from the motion but suggested
the maker include a timeline. 
Council Member DuBois suggested language for Item C( ii). 
Council Member Cormack agreed. 
MOTION AMENDED:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Council
Member Cormack to:   
A. 
Direct Staff to pause preparation of the Cubberley Concept Plan CEQA; 
B. 
Request a joint meeting with the PAUSD School Board and City Council; 
C. 
Ask Staff return to Council with a work plan to include: 
i. 
Exploring a land swap at Fletcher or financial framework for
acquiring available land; and
ii. 
Scope the design process for Cubberley Community Center
that is City owned once the acreage is determined. 
Vice Mayor
Kou inquired if there is a timeline
of when the acres can be
determined.  She understood there was no land swap at Fletcher Middle School
but rather the dedicated parkland near the school. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Council Member DuBois confirmed that was the intention of the motion.  He
expressed
concern
about having
a timeline
because
it may constrain
the
discussion between PAUSD and the City.  
Vice Mayor Kou predicted that the community may be concerned that there is
no timeframe.  
Council Member Cormack recommended
placing a timeframe on Item B of the
motion. 
Mayor Burt stated that Council cannot unilaterally insist on a timeframe but
can seek within a certain timeframe. 
Council Member Cormack suggested having a discussion with PAUSD before
the summer of 2022. 
Mr. Shikada inquired if the financial framework is related to a land swap or
independent. 
Council Member DuBois confirmed it was intended to be independent. 
MOTION RESTATED:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Council
Member Cormack to:   
A. 
Direct Staff to pause preparation of the Cubberley Concept Plan CEQA; 
B. 
Request a joint meeting with the PAUSD School Board and City Council
prior to the June break; 
C. 
Ask Staff return to Council with a work plan to include: 
i. 
Exploring
a land swap at Fletcher
or financial
framework
for
acquiring available land; and
ii. 
Scope the design process for Cubberley Community Center that is
City owned once the acreage is determined. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
9. 
Provide Direction to Staff on Negotiations with Pets in Need for
Operations and Capital Improvements at the City' s Animal Shelter. 
Mayor Burt called for a 10-minute
break and announced
the Council
will
reconvene at 7: 51 P.M.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Community Services Director Kristen O’Kane reported the current agreement
with Pets in Need ( PIN) was for 5-year which was to terminate on January 17, 
2024.  Included in the contract was a clause that either party can terminate
the agreement without cause and PIN provided an early termination letter on
November 15, 2021, to terminate the contract in 12-months’ time.  Staff has
been in discussions with PIN regarding a possible new agreement. The 5-year
agreement
included compensation
from the City to PIN of $ 3.4 million over
the length of the agreement as well as $ 200,000 in on contingency fund as
well as $ 60,000 in funding for renovation
delays.  
Capital improvements
included
minor
improvements
to the existing
kennels, modular
building, 
medical suit, and a new kennel building.  The 2019 total cost estimate for the
capital improvements
was $ 3.4 million to be paid by the City.  Completed
projects included the medical suit design and construction; modular building
purchase and site prep; and new kennel building design.  One keynote was
after the new kennel building was designed, the estimate for construction cost
increased by $650,000, which exceeded the total capital expenditure that was
identified in the agreement.  The prior Director of PIN and Staff discussed the
short- fall and the prior Director of PIN requested that the City prioritize the
renovation of the existing kennels.  To date, the City has spent $ 1.8 million
on capital improvements.  
Through discussions, the City, Staff and PIN do
have an interest in advancing an agreement that would support a long- term
partnership.  
PIN’s
proposed
agreement
terms
included
a
long- term
agreement, evaluation
of the animal shelter database, a feral cat plan and
scope of capital improvement.  
Staff does not know the scope and cost for
additional capital projects.  Staff identified potential funding for future capital
improvements
in the Infrastructure
Reserve, Budget Stabilization
Reserve
BSR), 
Unallocated
Future
Revenue
Growth, Impact
Fee
Fund
and
the
Stanford University Medical Center Fund ( SUMC).  Regarding the timeline, the
existing contract is to expire in November 2022 and Staff needed sufficient
time to negotiate a new agreement with PIN or develop an alternative mode
of service delivery.  Staff sought direction from Council on how to pursue
forward. 
Council Member Cormack inquired if PIN has withdrawn the termination letter. 
Ms. O’Kane answered no.  
Council Member Cormack asked if PIN is fully staffed at Palo Alto Animal
Shelter. 
Ms. O’Kane answered no. 
Interim Executive
Director Valerie McCarthy confirmed that there are five
vacant positions out of 24 Staff. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Council
Member
Cormack
asked
how
long
does
it take
to
receive
an
appointment to spay or neuter an animal. 
Ms. McCarthy answered she was not sure. 
Council Member Cormack indicated Council has received a fair amount of
communication about that service.  
Ms. McCarthy noted that the shelter has been understaffed
in medical since
she took over the position.  Currently, the shelter did not have a Registered
Veterinary
Technician
which
has
crippled
the
shelter
from
performing
surgeries. 
Council Member Cormack asked what changes have been implemented
since
the death of the puppies. 
Ms. McCarthy reiterated that was a devastating event and never should have
happened.  Since the incident, PIN has put in place best- in-class transport
protocols. 
Council Member Stone wanted to know if there will be any remedies if PIN
reneges on the agreement after the City invests in the recommended proposed
improvements. 
Ms. O’Kane restated Staff and PIN are very early in discussions and there has
been no negotiation of agreement terms. 
Council Member Stone encouraged to explore it when negotiations begin.  He
inquired if there is a variety of agencies in the area that can provide similar
services as PIN.  
Ms. O’Kane confirmed that two Requests for Proposals ( RFP) were sent out.  
PIN responded to both RFPs and another organization responded to the second
time.  She agreed that a new RFP would be the least successful because there
are few shelter operators.  
Council Member Stone asked if a California Environmental
Quality Act ( CEQA) 
would be needed if Council changed the policy to a Trap- Neuter- Return ( TNR) 
Program. 
Ms. O’Kane mentioned that Los Angeles County did a CEQA review when they
changed their policy, but she did not know the details.  
Council Member Stone wanted to know if the analysis performed to determine
if contracting services are better than in-house services still applied.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Ms. O’Kane agreed
that there are different
scenarios
for how one would
operate
the
veterinary
clinic
and
recommended
that
Staff
explore
that
scenario again.  
Council Member DuBois understood that the City would decide by March 2022
whether
to renegotiate
with
PIN or explore
an alternative
option if an
agreement cannot be made. 
Ms. O’Kane confirmed the intent is to have a sold plan by the end of March
2022. 
City Manager Ed Shikada confirmed that March would provide enough time for
Staff to establish a partnership with an alternative provider if needed. 
Council Member DuBois recalled that the City would commit funding but also
PIN would do fundraising.  He inquired if any of the fundraisings were used for
capital improvements. 
Ms. O’Kane clarified that the fundraising
was to be used for building a new
shelter.  A feasibility study was done to determine if it was possible to raise
the funds for a new shelter and it indicated it would be difficult.  
Council Member DuBois wanted to know the current program for feral cats. 
Ms. McCarthy shared the cats are relocated outside of the jurisdiction.  When
a cat is relocated, it causes stress to the cat and decreases its survival rate.  
The quickest and humane way to mitigate a feral cat problem is to reintroduce
sterile feral cats to where they were taken from. 
Council Member DuBois pressed if other jurisdictions agree to take feral cats.  
Ms. McCarthy answered yes.  
Mayor Burt challenged if a sterile feral cat dies, would that result in another
cat taking over their area.  
Ms. McCarthy answered that she was not sure.  
Mayor Burt inquired if the new kennels would be built to the same size that
the kennels were when the shelter was serving the City of Mountain View.  
Ms. O’Kane indicated that prior to PIN taking over the shelter, it was rare that
the kennels became overcapacity.  
Mayor Burt understood
that a withdrawal
from the agreement
would mean
significant layoffs for PIN and negative impacts on the animals.  He mentioned
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
that the prior Director of PIN acted abruptly to the legal responses regarding
the deaths of the puppies.  He asked if the timeline was shortened because of
the actions taken by the priory Director of PIN and should the City be exploring
a tolling agreement. 
Ms. O’Kane acknowledged the timeline is challenging considering the current
agreement took 2-years to negotiate.  
Mayor Burt asked if PIN has explored tolling the Notice of Intent to Terminate. 
Ms. McCarthy requested that Mayor Burt explain what tolling is.  
Mayor Burt explained it is an extension beyond the termination date to allow
the two parties to discuss a new agreement. 
Ms. McCarthy answered that an extension can be agreed upon but requested
from the City that there be a good faith effort be made to work positively
together.  She acknowledged that there have been issues from both parties in
the
past
and
it
will
take
a
commitment
from
both
parties
to
work
collaboratively. 
Council Member DuBois requested that Staff comment on animal control. 
City Lead Animal Control Officer Cody Macartney concurred that since Ms. 
McCarthy has taken over there have been positive steps moving forward.  He
agreed with Ms. O’Kane’ s comment that there is a lot of work remaining.  
Michael Ferreria, a Member of the Executive Committee
of the Loma Prieta
Chapter of the Sierra Club, announced that the group is opposed to trapping
feral cats and then releasing them back into the community.  Having that as
a condition
that must be met or the agreement
will be terminated
has a
negative feel.  He appreciated
Council Member Stone’ s questions and hoped
that the City will not allow a TNR program. 
Giulianna Pendleton, the environmental
advocacy assistant for Santa Clara
Valley Audubon Society, shared that the Society objects to the proposed TNR
release program.  Feral cats are invasive predators with devastating impacts
on ecosystems.  The current agreement does not allow PIN to release feral
cats within the City or any partner City.  The current provision protects the
birds and wildlife from deportation and disease.  If the policy is changed, she
recommended
that a CEQA review be conducted. 
Eileen McLaughlin, Citizens Committee
to Complete the Refuge, concurred
that trapping and neutering feral cats is helpful, but shared the concerns
regarding return and release.  She argued that community cats are identified
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 21 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
by
TNR
practitioners, 
not
the
community.  
Feeding
feral
cats
attracts
unwanted wildlife and spreads diseases that can be transmitted
to humans. 
There have been no studies
that prove that TNR programs
successfully
manage cat populations.  She requested that Council retain the no release
rule. 
Karen Holman was pleased to hear that Staff and PIN are open to discussing
a new agreement.  She mentioned that Silicon Valley Animal Control Authority
SVACA) is not a no-kill service and that was one of the reasons why the City
did not pursue that organization.   She shared that the further away from a
lost pet, the less likelihood there is a reunion between the pet and its owner.  
Carole
Hyde, Director
of Programs
for Palo Alto Human
Society ( PAHS), 
supported the continued negotiations with PIN.  She emphasized that it is very
important to keep the shelter open as well as have a fully functional spay and
neuter clinic.  As a founding member of Stanford Cat Network, she vouched
that a TNR program
is a successful
way to control
homeless
cats.  
She
requested that Council obtain the ban on TNR in the Baylands, but allow there
to be a City release TNR. 
Leonor Delgado, Educational
Manager for PAHS, shared that PAHS supports
all efforts to retain and maintain the current animal services.  PAHS wanted
to see a fully functioning low- cost spay/ neuter clinic with low- cost vaccination
programs.  PAHS would like to see the homeless cat population addressed
through community outreach, financial aid and with a focus on saving lives.  
PAHS
supported
keeping
feral
cats
out
of
areas
designated
for
the
preservation of endangered species and a TNR program. 
Pam Decharo shared that responsible citizens have been working to feed, care
for, rehome, trap and neuter feral cats.   She was shocked that the City does
not have a formal program
to address
feral cats.  
She supported
a TNR
program, spay and neuter program, and an educational
support system to
manage homeless cats and care.  She greatly appreciated the City and Staff
for being open to new ideas. 
Mayor Burt asked if the current contract had a TNR requirement. 
Ms. O’Kane answered no. 
Council Member Cormack acknowledged
the large capital commitment that
the City will be providing.   She asked can there be a well- functioning animal
shelter with the capital commitment that the City has already made. 
Ms. O’Kane stated from Staff’ s perspective, either a new kennel building or
renovating the existing kennels would be sufficient.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 22 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Ms. McCarthy mentioned that there are currently 22 dog kennels and four ICU
units.  The issue with the existing kennels was there is no separation of the
animal kennels.   Using funds for the existing kennel was not a good use of
funds because there is no disease control, the materials are old and there is
no sound control.  PIN recommended that a new facility be built. 
Council Member DuBois agreed there have been mishaps from both parties.  
He invited Ms. McCarthy to share details regarding her background. 
Ms. McCarthy shared that for 20-years she was in the technology field.  For
the last 6-years, she’s been in the animal well fair industry and has a Masters' s
Degree in animal studies from New York University.  She was involved with
the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ( ASPCA) and
Best Friends.  
The success of a shelter meant collaboration
on all levels
including human support services.  
Council Member
DuBois found Ms. McCarthy’ s background
impressive.  
He
agreed
that
for
the
short- term, Staff
should
negotiate
to
extend
the
termination
and allow 12-months to find a replacement
after it has been
decided that the City and PIN will not work together.  He wanted to see a fixed
budget amount rather than an open- ended amount and that be included in
the negotiations.   He supported having the shelter use different software.  He
felt that a TNR program would turn cat supporters against wildlife supporters.  
Also, there are many parks in Palo Alto and he was concerned about sensitive
habitat areas.  He requested that TNR not be part of the Memorandum
of
Understanding ( MOU) to allow for further discussions.  He supported focusing
on putting in place an MOU quickly.  
Council Member Stone agreed with Council Member DuBois regarding TNR.  
He shared that the program made sense but acknowledged the speakers who
shared comments
about sensitive habitats.  If a TNR is moved forward, he
recommended it be clear where cats can be released.   He asked why it was
not sufficient to release cats outside of the City.  
Ms. McCarthy clarified that the shelter tries to find homes for feral cats that
come in, but acknowledged
that it is very difficult to socialize a feral cat.  She
requested that Council not decide on the TNR program until PIN can put forth
their side in a more formal manner.  
Council Member Stone agreed that was a fair request and encouraged PIN to
share research regarding TNR with Council before the item comes back.  He
requested Staff share their comments on a new database. 
Ms. O’Kane indicated it is not an issue if all parties can agree on the system.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 23 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Council Member Stone supported the comment to toll the termination notice.  
Mayor Burt appreciated
the good faith efforts that both PIN and Staff were
proceeding under.  He recommended there be a tolling period of 6-months for
the City and PIN to negotiate a new agreement. 
MOTION: Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth to direct
Staff to:  
A: 
Proceed with negotiations
with Pets in Need for a long term contract
agreement for animal services in Palo Alto;  
B: 
That the notice of termination
is extended
six months
beyond the
current date;  
C: 
We evaluate the necessary kennel size for community partners that we
serve;  
D: 
Include some form of trap and neuter program; include a small animal
area in the plans;  
E: 
Assure that the contract agrees upon hours of operation;  
F: 
That the parties agree to pursue a fundraising program to supplement
capital needs for the shelter.  
Mayor Burt mentioned that it may be a combination
of releasing a cat in the
community, or adoption, or releasing a cat outside the City for a TNR program
to be successful.  
Regarding
capital fundraising, he mentioned
due to the
Covid- 19 Pandemic, the City was constrained on how much it can invest in
capital projects.  he predicted it was feasible having a portion of the capital
plan be based upon fundraising
and that the City should base how much
funding it will provide for capital improvements
on fundraising efforts.  
Council Member Filseth agreed with Mayor Burt’s comments.   He stated that
the kennels have to be updated to keep the shelter up to compliance.  That
should
be done
no matter
who operated
it.  He acknowledged
that the
community wants Palo Alto to have a shelter.  He shared his faith in PIN and
was delighted to hear they wish to negotiate a new agreement with the City.  
He agreed with Council Member DuBois that TNR programs pit wildlife folks
against cat folks, but there was an overarching agreement that there should
not be a feral cat colony in the City.  
Council Member Cormack requested that the motion include exploring and
transitioning to a new database. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 24 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Mayor Burt agreed. 
Council Member Filseth supported the amendment. 
Council Member Cormack inquired if there is currently a small animal area at
the shelter. 
Ms. O’Kane answered yes. 
Council Member Cormack asked why that was included in the motion.  
Ms. O’Kane explained
the request
is to renovate, expand
and include
an
outdoor area for small pets. 
Mayor Burt suggested the motion state that a small animal area be included
in the renovation plans.  
Council Member Filseth mentioned that one of the ambiguous areas in the past
was the disposition of pet animals that are not dogs and cats.  He inquired if
small animal refers to animals other than dogs and cats or just cats. 
Ms. O’Kane clarified that PIN requested that there be renovation
and better
utilization of the small animal area.  
Mayor Burt asked if the motion should include a small animal area in the
renovation plans or should it include operations as well.  
Ms. O’Kane confirmed that her comment referred to the renovation plans. 
Mayor Burt recommended the small animal area be included in the renovation
plan.  
Council Member Filseth accepted. 
Council
Member
Cormack
acknowledged
that there
is a concern
in the
community that the desired services have not been provided.  She suggested
the motion rea,  upon hours of operation and services provided. 
Mayor Burt accepted the amendment. 
Council Member Filseth agreed. 
Council Member Cormack inquired if consequences
should be outlined if the
level of service is not provided. 
Mayor Burt believed those would be built into the contract negotiations.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 25 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Council Member Cormack recalled that the feasibility study was not consistent
with sufficient
community
support
for financials.  
She requested
that the
fundraising portion of the motion be separate from the main motion during
voting.  She suggested the motion say supplement already identified capital
needs. 
Mayor Burt inquired if Council Member Cormack understood the motion to say
that the City would be a leader in the fundraising as opposed to a more open-
ended intent.  
Council Member Cormack stated she understood
that the City will be the
leader in fundraising efforts. 
Mayor Burt clarified the intent was not to have the City be a participant in the
fundraising program but rather pursue it with other partners. 
Council Member Cormack affirmed to limit the City’s capital expenditures to
the
identified
dollar
amount
and
to not
use
Staff
resources
to pursue
fundraising programs. 
Mayor
Burt agreed
that Staff
resources
should
not be used to explore
fundraising and supported Council Member Cormack’ s request to limit capital
expenditures to the already identified dollar amount. 
MOTION AS AMENDED: Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member
Filseth to direct Staff to:  
A. 
Proceed with negotiations with Pets in Need for a long- term contract
agreement for animal services in Palo Alto;  
B. 
That the notice of termination
be extended six months beyond the
current data;  
C. 
Evaluate the necessary kennel size for community partners that we
serve; 
D. 
Include some form of trap and neuter program;  
E. 
Include a small animal area in the renovation plans;  
F. 
Assure that the contract agrees upon hours of operation and services
provided;  
G. 
That the parties agree to pursue a fundraising program to supplement
existing capital commitments
for the shelter; and
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 26 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
H. 
Explore the transition to a new database. 
Ms. Stump suggested that Item B of the motion be clarified.  
Mayor Burt inquired if PIN supported Item B of the motion.  
Ms. McCarthy shared that the Board of PIN has not discussed extending the
notice of termination but would be open to discussions.   She mentioned that
there are items in the motion that the Board of PIN has not discussed. 
Mayor Burt proposed to move Item B to Item A and change the language. 
MOTION AS AMENDED:    Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member
Filseth to direct Staff to:  
A. 
That as a condition for continuing good faith negotiations, that Pets in
Need would agree to extend the notice of termination six months beyond
the current date;  
B. 
Proceed with negotiations with Pets in Need for a long- term contract
agreement for animal services in Palo Alto;  
C. 
Evaluate
the necessary
kennel
size for community
partners
that we
serve;  
D. 
Include some form of trap and neuter program;  
E. 
Include a small animal area in the renovation plans;  
F. 
Assure that the contract agrees upon hours of operation and services
provided;  
G. 
That the parties agree to pursue a fundraising program to supplement
existing capital commitments for the shelter; and
H. 
Explore the transition to a new database.  
Council Member DuBois inquired what items in the motion would the Board of
PIN need to discuss.  
Ms. McCarthy stated that they would have to discuss the fundraising program
and the improvements to the shelter.  
Council Member Filseth asked if the intention is to have the fundraising efforts
fill the gap for improvements
to the shelter. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 27 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Mayor Burt clarified that Item G of the motion is not framed in a way that
required specific outcomes.  
Council Member
DuBois mentioned
that the existing kennels are old and
understood that was the main point of the MOU was to update the kennels.  
He asked what the purpose was for Item C of the motion. 
Mayor Burt recommended that Staff explore the size and modernization of the
kennels and bring Council recommendations. 
Council Member DuBois asked if the exterior of the existing building will be
changed or it if was only the internal space. 
Ms. O’Kane clarified that PIN had requested to demolish the existing kennel
building and build a new building.  
Council Member DuBois wanted Staff to have the ability to negotiate additional
capital investment if it is needed. 
Mayor Burt wanted to constrain costs while meeting the modernization needs. 
Council
Member
DuBois
asked
how
much
money
is left for the capital
improvement fund.  
Ms. O’Kane answered $ 1.6 million.  
Vice Mayor Kou wanted to know if there has been a decrease in the number
of dogs that have come to the shelter over the last 3-years. 
Ms. McCarthy shared that it has been steady but all of the kennels are not
utilized.   She shared that the existing contract approved 38 kennels and PIN’s
request was for 24 kennels.  
Vice Mayor Kou asked if Item C of the motion was intended to limit the size of
the kennels. 
Mayor Burt restated the intention was to continue to provide services that
meet the community’ s needs.  He supported the actions of helping other
communities
with their shelter needs but stated the City is facing financial
constraints that do not allow the City to do that.  
Council Member Filseth mentioned that the previous operation of the shelter
is not a good reference point and PIN has been much more active in adopting
out animals.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 28 of 28
Sp. City Council Meeting
Summary Minutes:  02/ 14/2022
Council Member Questions, Comments, Announcements
Council Member DuBois remarked that there will be a signing ceremony at
9: 00 A.M. with Bloomingburg, IN on February 15, 2022. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 9: 35 P.M. 
