CITY COUNCIL 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 101 
Special Meeting 
 
November 28, 2022 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Cormack, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Present Remotely:  
DuBois 
Absent: 
 
 
None  
CALL TO ORDER 
Mayor Burt called the meeting to order and asked the clerk to call the roll. 
 
Public Comment 
Ken Horowitz: Comments on schools attended city schools and wanted to 
speak up about Cubberley Community Center new school board member and 
three Council member. Cubberley Community Center is an issue that should 
be addressed. In the next two years is the lease that expires 2024 $3 million 
dollars and city contributes to fund and maintenance costs, and emergency 
costs. One item addressed and the future of Cubberley and the school liaison 
meeting said its one of his four Cs.The Superindent Mr. Austin mentioned his 
attorney is going to free up his schedule to take up the issue. The new 
committee (school liaison) only lasted 37 meeting. Will take an active role in 
the future of Cubberley. Developing the community center.  
Rob Levitsky: tree was cut down on 1125 Bryon street oak tree 30-inch 
background of house. It was not affecting structure. The city website tree 
removal coastlive oak approved to development project compared to 
Mountain View similar 575 Sierra Ave house in front and seven redwood 
trees. Same as Bryon street. And people were up in arms and he spoke Parks 
& Recreation voted to let the tree stand. Why is it different between the cities 
and interrupt by planning is not clear. Council saved Castilla project trees. 
Other trees going down near Forest look into it no permit no action taking. 
LLC.  
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Bill Ross: significant for community Saturday night David Shaw resigned 
tenure there Stanford coach had the ability to influence Palo Alto school 
system to accomplish things to the greatest of their ability. Using the sense 
to influence his views on how families deal with Cancer Stanford Community 
and and I don’t know certificates of participation if anyone that has been a 
figure at Stanford influenced male and female certificate of appreciation. 
Recognizing. Request to certificate of appreciation. 
Maya: Junior at Gunn High school and member of student climate coalition. 
Remind issue of climate approving implementation of s-cap speedier grid 
modernization and construction which are crucial and stable reliable 
infrastructure, continue to electrify increase education and implement 
awareness within the community. reduce emissions as we near 2024 goal 
entirely. Continue to prioritize.   
Matt: thank you city council and city staff of importance of our community 
stop burning fossil fuels and thereby lowering greenhouse gas emissions 
2023 heat pump water heater program replacing fossil fuel with electric clean 
and 6000 residential units center the reeducation materials minimal 
greenhouse gas and no emit greenhouse gas. Work in city by living close and 
working close and appreciate the units will be available remove commute 
minimization of greenhouse and this development  
Aram: Greg Tanaka vice Mayor in 2023 but love about him he has these 
meetings to open to public reparations, open police hiring, tasers, and k9’s 
support for Vice Mayor.  If Lydia doesn’t want and will step down. Last time I 
august 11th November 3rd open discussion savage k9 on our streets. Andrew 
Binder doesn’t want to address the racial. Trial by ambush. Post article police 
working dogless. Four months on November new police dog Cody. Savage 
trained on often not trained well dog handlers and Binder doesn’t want to 
address it. Racial component since enslaved people and attack African 
Americans RIPA data consent searches, prolonged detention, race and 
policing. Banning k9s. 
Liz: Mayfield Place propose question, who owns palo alto protecting one zone 
r-1 zone. Those who exist are hurting those who work service and teachers. 
Those who exist outside of r1 zone are hurting retail service workers raising,  
rent costs, rental properties being owned by large corporations, Segway 
construction managed by Related California substandard. Unit has without 
hot water since thanksgiving is stove is faulty and failed Housing and Urban 
developments. Need rent stabilization and other discussed ordinances living 
on the edge indeed care about the community jobs are insecure and housing 
is insecure and vulnerable situation working and living people living within 
the City of Palo Alto. Robotic algorithmic and vulnerabilities. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Consent Calendar 
Vice Mayor Kou register a no vote on Agenda item Number 2.  
Council Member Cormack registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 3. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 8. 
 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to approve Agenda Item 
Numbers 1-8. 
Motion Passed Items 1, 4-7: 7-0 
Motion Passed Item 2:  6-1 Kou no 
Motion Passed Item 3:  6-1 Cormack no 
Motion Passed Item 8:  6-1 Tanaka no 
 
1. Approve Minutes from the November 7 and November 14, 2022 City Council Meetings 
2. SECOND READING: Adopted Ordinance 5572 to Continue the Pilot 
Parklet Program and Other On-Street Uses During Transition Period 
(FIRST READING: October 24, 2022 PASSED 7-0) 
3. Adopted Ordinance 5573 extending the Term of Ordinance No. 5517 
by an Additional 18 Months to Expire on June 16, 2024. Ordinance 
5517 Amends Title 18 (Zoning) of the Palo Alto Municipal Code to 
Update Definitions, Broaden Permitted Uses and Provide Limits on 
Certain Uses through Updates to the Conditional Use Permit 
Thresholds. Environmental Review: CEQA Exemption 15061(b)(3) 
4. Approve an Amendment to the Legal Service Agreement with 
Colantuono, Highsmith & Whatley, PC (Contract S17167696) to 
Increase the Contract Amount by an Additional $120,000 for a new 
Not-to-Exceed Amount of $575,000 and Extend the Term to October 1, 
2027 
5. Policy And Services Recommendation Regarding New Council Member 
Orientation & Onboarding Program 
6. QUASI-JUDICIAL. 419 Palm (14PLN-00410): Consideration to Approve 
a Building Permit Extension in Accordance With Palo Alto Municipal 
Code Section 16.04.090. Environmental Analysis: A Mitigated Negative 
Declaration was Approved on September 2, 2016. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
7. Approval of a Purchase Order With National Auto Fleet Group in an 
Amount Not to Exceed $377,826 for the Purchase of a 2023 Chevrolet 
G4500 Type III Ambulance, Utilizing a Cooperative Purchase 
Agreement 
8. Approval of a Purchase Order with Golden State Fire Apparatus in an 
Amount Not to Exceed $1,168,875 for the Purchase of a 2022 Pierce 
Enforcer Heavy Duty Rescue, Utilizing a Cooperative Purchase Agreement 
 
City Manager Comments 
 
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager  
 
 
BEGIN VERBATIM MINUTES  
 
 
Pat Burt: 
So we'll now move on to Item Number 9, which is review of and 
direction to staff to submit the Draft 2023 to 2031 Housing 
Element to the State Department of Housing and Community 
Development for its 90-day review. The Planning and 
Transportation Commission will participate in a Joint Meeting 
with the City Council to discuss the Draft Housing Element and 
Environmental Review. This action is not a project in accordance 
with the CEQA guidelines. Before we continue, Council Member 
Cormack? 
 
Alison Cormack: Thank you, Mayor Burt. I will be recusing myself from this item. 
This year, Stanford University through an affiliate entity was a 
source of income for me. It is reasonably foreseeable that the 
City’s decisions regarding the Housing Element will have a 
material financial impact on Stanford’s assets.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. And while we have Planning Commissioners joining 
us, I just wanted to go through what we anticipate as kinda the 
process that we’ll have tonight. So we'll initially have a thorough 
presentation by City Staff of the Staff Report and then the 
Council will hear from members of the Planning and 
Transportation [inaudible 48:22] Commission and the [inaudible 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
48:24] going to be coming as a consensus recommendation of 
the Commission is because they have not reviewed this current 
draft of the report as a commission. They had previously 
reviewed the goals and programs that the Council took up a 
month-plus ago and had made recommendations on that basis 
but they have not convened as a body on this big draft. So 
Director Lait, would you like to kick things off? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Sure. Thank you, Mayor Burt, and good evening, City Council. 
Good evening, Chair Lauing and Planning and Transportation 
Commissioners. We are here to present the Draft Housing 
Element and I'm gonna ask Tim Wong, our project manager, for 
this epic journey to lead us through a presentation and then we'd 
be happy to answer questions. 
 
Tim Wong: 
[Well 49:41] – okay. So good evening, Mayor Burt and Members 
of the Council. Again, my name is Tim Wong, Senior Planner, and 
so happy to take you through this presentation. Next slide, 
please – so tonight staff is requesting that the Council A) conduct 
a Joint Meeting, secondly to review and provide direction to staff 
in regards to certain added language, more specifically for added 
programs and other items, and then lastly to direct staff to 
submit the draft to HCD for its review. Next slide, please – so real 
quickly, next slide – What is a housing element? It's one of the 
mandated elements in a general plan or for Palo Alto, the 
Comprehensive Plan and it is the only element that requires 
approval by the state. Next slide – and for this new housing 
element cycle, this new upcoming Sixth Cycle Housing Element, 
there is a new requirement, which is Affirmatively Furthering Fair 
Housing. And this is a new state requirement that requires each 
jurisdiction to put in proactive fair housing measures to address 
the following topic areas, such as Fair Housing Enforcement to 
analyze patterns of segregation and to attempt to minimize those 
patterns, also to minimize disparities in access, also 
disproportionate housing needs and, lastly, to identify racially 
and ethnically concentrated areas of poverty and affluence and 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
how to potentially break those down. But in Palo Alto, we do not 
have this fifth item.  
 
 
Next slide, please – and so another requirement – the Council is 
well familiar with this – is the Regional Housing Needs Allocation 
or RHNA for short. And in a nutshell, it is the City’s [fair share of 
51:55] this upcoming planning period through 2031. And this is a 
number that is determined by the state. Next slide, please – and 
so here are the RHNA numbers for this upcoming sixth cycle, a 
little over 6,000 units with approximately 2,400 units for very 
low, low and I should throw in there extremely low income 
households. And this is about a 300 percent increase than our 
fifth cycle RHNA, which is a little less than 2,000 units. Next slide 
– and also the Housing Plan is a part of the Housing Element that 
contains the housing programs and these programs are to spur 
housing production, especially affordable housing production in 
addition to, as mentioned, fair housing requirements. And these 
programs must touch on each of these categories – housing 
preservation, affordable housing, housing development. You can 
see these different categories through the filter of these fair 
housing requirements, which makes this draft much more 
complex than the previous draft. But I'll go into some of these 
programs in a bit. Next slide, please – and so some details about 
the City’s Public Review Draft. Next slide – so here’s the 
composition of the Housing Element and it starts with the 
Executive Summary. I'm sure you’ve read all 500 pages of the 
draft but I'll just go over this for you.  
 
 
The Executive Summary; introduction; housing needs; housing 
resources in which as part of the housing resources we need to 
provide justification for why our sites were selected; housing 
constraints, which identify both governmental and 
nongovernmental constraints; the housing plan, [which we 
54:06] just elaborated to, that includes our goals, policies and 
programs; and lastly, it ends with the appendices, which includes 
our full sites list with detailed information and our AFFH analysis. 
Next slide – and just some high points, so as mentioned, the City 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Council approved the sites in March of 2022 and as part of that 
identified over 290 sites to help meet the – the City meet its 
RHNA. And of significance is a much higher density proposed for 
the Research Office Limited Manufacturing or ROLM Zone District 
for short and General Manufacturing Zoned Districts. And those 
are the areas that are basically bounded by Charleston and San 
Antonio against Highway 101. And just also to remind the Council 
that the rezones, the up-zoning for all these sites must be 
completed by January of 2024 to help meet our RHNA. With 
these sites, we have proposed many sites to be up-zoned and 
again those need to be completed by January of 2024. I'll talk 
about a update schedule that should have the Council adopting 
mid-2023, so these zone amendments will probably come right 
on the tails of that adoption. Next slide – for programs, the 
Council reviewed the goals, policies and programs in August of 
2022.  
 
 
There are 26 programs with many implementing objectives for 
each of those programs. A highlight or a significant program is 
the Housing Incentive Program or HIP for short. That’s Program 
3.4. This is the City’s alternative to State Density Bonus. And 
currently we are going through a financial and development 
feasibility study to look at what actual development standards 
would constitute a feasible program and, based on that study, we 
will be revising the developed standards of the HIP. In addition, 
we are expanding areas where the HIP can be applied and it's a 
substantial increase in area, RM zones included. And this is to be 
completed by December of 2024. Also other programs include 
fair housing programs, which the City will conduct more robust 
outreach, including education workshops to both educate 
tenants and property managers/landlords about Fair Housing 
rights and also tenant protections as directed by the Council. And 
those should be implemented by December of 2023. Next slide – 
and the Public Review Draft requirements do require a 30-day 
public review and so the draft was released on November 7 and 
the deadline, if you will, or the end of the 30-day period is 
December 7. As part of the 30-day public review, staff conducted 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
a virtual November 16 community meeting where we highlighted 
different aspects of the draft and took community comments and 
questions. As part of the 30-Day Public Review, we've also done 
extensive public outreach via email, social media, print ad and 
also updating our website for the update. 
 
 
And for the public to submit comments, if you could please use 
the heupdate@cityofpaloalto.org email. So we've dedicated an 
email to receive comments and for the public. Again, if you're 
gonna make comments, please use this email. If you don’t have 
access to email, please submit a written correspondence via snail 
mail if you could. But we will only consider public comments 
through this email address. And then after the expiration of the 
30-day review period, the City has 10 business days to respond, 
to review and to respond, if you will, to the comments. And what 
is meant by respond is the City will summarize these comments 
whether these comments – certain comments were put in the 
public review draft or revise the draft or if some of these 
comments were considered and just chosen not to be included. 
But we must respond to each of the comments. And only after 
the public review can the City submit to HCD. HCD has 2 
submittal periods. So after this 30-day review, we will be 
submitting to HCD for their initial 90-day review. And as part of 
that, we will complete the public comment section of the draft to 
summarize what staff did with all the comments that receive 
prior to submittal to HCD. Next slide – and just to highlight, these 
are the additional programs that the Council did not consider in 
their August meeting. Next slide – this is based on additional 
guidance from HCD and from our consultant that staff prepared 
for new programs.  
 
 
Next slide, please. Oh, thanks. And just to let the Council know, 
staff anticipates adding more implementing objectives, not 
necessarily new policies or programs but implementing 
objectives for additional – for the approved programs, especially 
for AFFH to the approved programs. Staff has been reviewing 
Southern [California 1:00:37] letters and now some Bay Area 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
jurisdictions have received comment letters and we're reviewing 
those comment letters too. And based on those letters, we may 
need to add additional implementing objectives to our programs. 
But again we do not anticipate any significant or substantive 
policy changes to the housing element. Again, it's more to add 
implementing objectives to meet HCD criteria or requirements 
for a more compliant Housing Element. Next slide – so the first 
program is a lot consolidation program. Because the City has 
such a high amount of smaller lots, smaller being less than 
10,000 square feet, HCD looks favorably upon a lot consolidation 
program where there’s the potential to consolidate lots and 
hopefully have a greater – a more feasible project due to larger 
lots. The second program is – next slide, please – sorry – 
objective standards for the South of Forest Coordinated Plan 
better known as SOFA. Objective standards were recently 
adopted within the last year. However, the SOFA area was not 
included, so this is to fold in objective standards for SOFA. This 
helps add to spurring housing production by creating a more 
streamlined process. Next slide – annual zoning updates.  
 
 
This is more of an HCD catchall program where the state wants 
us to be compliant with state and federal law, whatever that may 
be, in regards to housing. So this is a commitment to update the 
City’s zoning ordinance at a minimum once a year to be in 
compliance or consistent with state and federal law. And the last 
– next slide – the last one is this is purely administrative but 
required, is that we must provide an adopted housing element to 
the water supplier within 30 days of adoption. And this is a state 
requirement, so we are adding this program in but it's fairly 
easily achievable. So that’s the fourth program. Next slide – and 
just wanted to touch on a quick schedule update. So next slide – 
so in the red here we are fall of 2022 with the public review of 
the Draft Housing Element. As mentioned, we will be spending 
the next few weeks responding to comments and revising the 
draft and preparing it for HCD review and that’ll be in the winter 
of 2022 going through February of ’23. Spring of ’23, we're 
looking at the completion of environmental review as well as 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
revising the Housing Element Draft per HCD comments in 
anticipation for the City Council to be ready to review and adopt 
in mid-2023. So that’s our schedule. Next slide – and staff would 
just like to highlight the builder’s remedy. I'm sure that the 
Council has been hearing this.  
 
 
This builder’s remedy has been circulating throughout the state 
in which this builder’s remedy is part of the Housing 
Accountability Act, which allows a builder to potentially develop 
something that could be inconsistent with the City zoning and 
General Plan. But this applies to those jurisdictions that are out 
of compliance when – and if the developer proposes to have a 
certain affordability percentage in the proposed development. 
And I believe the Council has received additional information 
about the builder’s remedy from the City attorney. But this is just 
to highlight. And again, this applies to those jurisdictions without 
a compliant housing element. Next slide, please – so again, we're 
in the 30-day review period, which ends December 7, so, public, 
please get your comments in by that time at this email at 
heupdate@cityofpaloalto.org. Again, we have 10 business days 
to review and address the comments and staff hopes to submit 
no later than December 22 for HCD’s 90-day review when the – 
in February when the letter comes back, staff will revise the draft 
per those comments whatever they may be. And just to let you 
know that HCD does have a second 60-day review to review to 
make sure that the City has revised their initial draft to be 
consistent with HCD’s 90-day comments. Next slide – and so 
again here is staff’s recommendation. That concludes staff’s 
presentation and be happy to answer any questions that the 
Council or PTC may have.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. So at this time, I'd like to turn to the members of the 
PTC, initially Chair Lauing and with an understanding that you 
haven't had the opportunity as a body to weigh in and make a 
consensus recommendation on this element. So we would just 
welcome your individual comments as well as any other follow-
up you have from your previous review. Chair Lauing? 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Ed Lauing: 
Is this live? Oh, great. Okay. Yes. Thank you. I've now had about 
18 months of experience with this Housing Element ‘cause I 
joined the Working Group with Tim 18 months ago. So I thought 
I'd just comment first on how that’s evolved and what I think is 
really there. It was just an excellent Working Group put together 
by Council of appointed members that was a really good cross-
section. They worked really hard and really effectively to kinda 
work on these things and so did the PTC. When we got it next, we 
set up a Ad Hoc group. Let's see – all the commissioners sittin’ 
here? 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 1:07:46]. 
 
Ed Lauing: 
Yeah. And Cari Templeton as well. So we worked in the detail and 
then we worked it from the [dias 1:07:51] in multiple meetings. 
In both of those groups, I just wanna emphasize, particularly for 
the benefit of the public that’s listening, there was always a focus 
on what are the real needs of Palo Alto citizens going forward for 
the next 8 years. This was not, okay, how do we fulfil the 
mandate. We didn’t even talk about the mandate or the [HEWC 
1:08:14] for a while. And so I feel like at the end of the process 
here, it has really high integrity in terms of the priorities that are 
truly needed for us going forward.  
 
 
And we came up with some that matched the state, particularly 
emphasis on affordable housing, which came up very strong in 
the Housing Element Working Group, then some other segments 
that had needs, like the growing senior population and some of 
our special needs people. And then maybe as a surprise to the 
state, we also said we need some big houses here because when 
we have people move here, we'd like’m to move here and then 
stay here and have families. So we actually do want some 
inventory, [other 1:08:53] large houses as well. So I feel that the 
comprehensiveness of the review by both the bodies that I've 
been on really added a lot of integrity to the priorities here and 
feel pretty good about that. And I hope also the state feels good 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
that we're compelling in terms of the way we present this. So, 
others? 
 
Keith Reckdahl: Yeah. I wanna add one of the things that the Housing Element 
Work Group really – oh, I'm Keith Reckdahl on PTC and I was also 
with Ed on the Housing Element Work Group. And on the 
Housing Element Work Group, one of the things that was really 
important to people was quality of life. We have these people 
coming in to the community. We have a wonderful community 
here, great parks, great bike paths and we just don’t want to 
warehouse these people. They're – we're entering them into the 
community. We want them to have the same type of amenities 
that we have, so that takes planning. Making a park is easier said 
than done. You have to assemble lots unless you wanna go with 
pocket parks but that really limits the type of recreation you can 
have. So you have to assemble lots and plan that ahead a time 
before it gets built out or you may not have room for a park and 
so that’s very challenging. It takes a lot of planning ahead a time. 
And this is not our land and so we have to kind of look in the 
crystal ball and say what are the landlords, what are the owners 
going to do and that becomes very difficult. I did have one 
question for Tim about the presentation. For the builder’s 
remedy, it's 20 percent lower income. Which categories do they 
have to provide the... 
 
Tim Wong: 
For lower income, that would be 80 percent or below, 80 percent 
AMI or below.  
 
Keith Reckdahl: Okay. Up to 80 percent, which means 79 percent. Okay. Thank 
you.  
 
Bryna Chang: 
So I'm Bryna Chang [was 1:11:03] clearly on the PTC but also part 
of the PTC Ad Hoc. And I think as Commissioner Reckdahl has 
said before, what we're faced with now is a lot of – that the 
housing requirements are going to make everybody in the City 
uncomfortable and that means we're probably gonna need to go 
higher and denser than we have before. And what the PTC Ad 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Hoc discussion also reflected was to choose the right spots for 
that. And then all throughout, I think many of us on the PTC were 
very concerned about the planning that’s necessary to make this 
happen but in a way that where we can preserve quality of life 
and make quality of life palatable for all, with newcomers as well. 
So planning area plans, which was we heard a lot about in the 
last election cycle but given the large amounts of housing plan 
for [both the 1:12:18] ROLM and GM zones that that area, which 
is already really heavily impacted by traffic, it's gonna require a 
lot more planning and work and maybe funding in order to make 
sure that we don’t – that we have safe areas for people as well as 
don’t create gridlock.  
 
 
And then even aside from that area, we've talked about 
densifying and increasing height and other transportation 
corridors but the reality is that the public transportation 
infrastructure is pretty poor and so as a City, we're gonna have to 
plan to figure out that transportation element to make this all 
doable. I did have a question for Mr. Wong as well. The last 
iteration that the PTC saw, this did not have the quantified 
objectives for the programs, so I wondered what are the 
consequences if we missed those quantified objectives and how 
did we in general decide on those numbers? I recognize that it's a 
different question for every program but they're fairly specific 
quantified objectives. So I wanted to just understand a little bit 
more about the process that staff went through for those as well 
as the consequences. 
 
Tim Wong: 
Very good. Before I respond to that, I would like to say that our 
consultant, Brenna Weatherby, is also with us to help answer 
some of these questions. But I believe that HCD, in terms of 
consequences, HCD is scrutinizing each jurisdiction’s 
performance during the 8-year planning period much more 
heavily, if you will, especially production. And so if we do not 
meet our timeline, whatever that may be, for those – that 
particular program, HCD and maybe now with their new 
Enforcement Division could – that could be part of their 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
responsibilities, I think. But there are definitely more 
consequences for not meeting those timelines. As for the 
different timelines, for different programs, it was more working 
with Director Lait about staffing, workloads and kinda – I don’t 
wanna call it a triage but what programs are the higher priorities, 
what priorities do we have to meet to be in compliance with HCD 
requirements. And then from there, if these requirements have 
hard timelines, those were the first priorities, such as rezoning to 
meet our RHNA and then other programs kinda fell behind that 
based on its significance, if you will.  
 
Bryna Chang: 
So thank you. But I wasn’t necessarily asking about the timelines, 
although that is useful information. It was the quantified 
objectives. So for example, for one of the new programs for 
expediting lot consolidation, our quantified objective is expedite 
4 lot consolidation projects during the planning period. And so 
that’s awfully specific and I didn’t know – so I guess my first 
question is is there a consequence from HCD if we don’t meet 
that objective and depending on how big the consequence is, 
how do we come up with those numbers? Do we feel confident 
that we can make those numbers? Is it important that we do? 
And we have similar – throughout the programs and goals, there 
are similar other really concrete goals, which is great for 
measurement sake but I wondered what the implications were. 
 
Tim Wong: 
Okay. Well as part of it – thank you very much for your question. 
For lot consolidation, it depends on – part of it is how robust the 
incentives are for lot consolidation. But in terms of the Number 4 
Lot Consolidation programs, that was more thinking that maybe 
you could do 1 lot consolidation every 2 years. So that seemed 
like a realistic milestone to be – that was also feasible. 
 
Brenna Weatherby: 
Tim, this is Brenna. Would you like me to weigh in on the 
consequences a little bit? 
 
Tim Wong: 
Yeah. That would be great. Thanks. 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Brenna Weatherby: 
Okay. Sure. Hi, everyone. My name’s Brenna Weatherby. 
I'm Director of Environmental and Long-Range Planning with 
Rincon Consultants. We've been working with the City for almost 
2 years now on this Housing Element. Just to address the 
question on consequences, it's really yet to be seen with some of 
these programs about how HCD will respond if cities don’t meet 
their targets or the metrics that are laid out in the programs. 
However, what we've been told so far is that they're gonna take 
more of a softer approach, if you will, if metrics are not being 
met, that they will contact the city and work with that 
jurisdiction to see if the program can be changed in some way or 
if more can be added or more can be done to try and meet that 
metric. So we've had discussions with HCD and other jurisdictions 
particularly regarding ADU units.  
 
 
And if the jurisdiction is not achieving production of ADU units at 
the rate that they anticipate, because it is an 8-year planning 
period, it's a long period, so what HCD has stated to us that 
they’ll be doing is taking a look midcycle and if things aren't on 
track with the production of units, then they’ll be working with 
the jurisdiction to see what changes can be made. It may be 
more action items. It may be more targeted items. Maybe the 
action item is great in theory but it's not targeted in the right 
spot within the city. So that’s what we've been told so far, is that 
they will be reaching out but it’ll be a softer approach with trying 
to work with the jurisdiction to see what can be changed to get 
that metric back on track.  
 
Doria Summa: 
Commissioner Summa here. So thank you for inviting us to 
participate tonight. I just wanted to also give a shoutout to the 
Working Group and staff who seem to do an almost impossible 
task very thoughtfully. And it's something we have to do by law. 
That said, I'm a little disappointed the state – given the State 
Auditors Report and differences of opinions from other experts 
and some of the changes that we don’t really know like if we 
have vacancies, the COVID changes, if those are gonna stick 
around, a lot of residential vacancies and/or the impact of 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
working from home whether that would stay. I was a little 
disappointed they didn’t reconsider some of these numbers that 
seem unachievable. That being said, we're moving ahead. I also 
agree with my colleagues that affordability was a really 
important thing ‘cause that’s, as we all know, the real reason 
people can't live here, not because there isn't an empty unit but 
because they can't afford it. I had 2 comments about the new 
additional programs. The Lot Consolidation Program, is that for 
commercial properties or multifamily and commercial? 
 
Tim Wong: 
Commissioner Summa, I would say... 
 
Doria Summa: 
[Inaudible 1:20:12]. 
 
Tim Wong: 
...it has to have a housing component to it... 
 
Doria Summa: 
[Inaudible 1:20:15]. 
 
Tim Wong: 
...so mixed use or... 
 
Doria Summa: 
[But 1:20:17] in a...  
 
Tim Wong: 
...[inaudible 1:20:17]... 
 
Doria Summa: 
...commercial... 
 
Tim Wong: 
...residential.  
 
Doria Summa: 
...districts I meant to say. Sorry. Commercial districts mostly or...? 
 
Tim Wong: 
Where-... 
 
Doria Summa: 
I mean... 
 
Tim Wong: 
...-ever... 
 
Doria Summa: 
...I’m just asking. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Tim Wong: 
...possible. 
 
Doria Summa: 
It wasn’t... 
 
Tim Wong: 
Yeah. Wherever... 
 
Doria Summa: 
[Is 1:20:28]... 
 
Tim Wong: 
...they – any developer could take advantage of it to produce 
additional housing. 
 
Doria Summa: 
Okay. So I don’t think we're talking about making bigger houses 
on bigger lots necessary in R1, more for multifamily. 
 
Tim Wong: 
That is correct. It is strictly focused on more multifamily 
production.  
 
Doria Summa: 
Okay. Thanks. That’s what I was thinking. And then I also wanted 
to mention about that something that I've often mentioned and 
that is a need for realistic transition zones that don’t have 
negative impact, so maintaining those. With the SOFA objective 
standards, I think SOFA has for so long been held up as one of the 
best planning exercises in implementations in the City. Just 
wanna make very sure that when we do objective standards 
there we don’t somehow mess that up because it has been so 
successful. And then I had a question about the builder’s remedy, 
which is the 20 percent at an up to 80 percent AMI. And within 
that 80 percent, is – could it all be 80? All of the 20 percent of the 
units, could it be at 80 percent AMI or is it somehow distributed 
evenly or in some other preferable way within the percentage? 
 
Tim Wong: 
I think as long as they propose 20 percent [up 1:21:52] that 
doesn’t exceed 80 percent AMI, I think that meets the... 
 
Doria Summa: 
Okay. 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Tim Wong: 
...builder’s remedy. Yeah.  
 
Doria Summa: 
Okay. Thank you for that. And oh, one really specific question: I 
noticed that on the [inaudible 1:22:06] interactive map that it still 
has the MacArthur Park site, 27 University, as a site for 
redevelopment but I notice that’s not in the big book now. So has 
that been taken off and it just hasn’t been updated on the map? 
 
Tim Wong: 
Yes. Good... 
 
Doria Summa: 
[Inaudible 1:22:27]. 
 
Tim Wong: 
...observation. The interactive map does need to be updated. As 
you see, it's probably been since April. So we do need – that 
kinda fell by the wayside as we focused on... 
 
Doria Summa: 
Okay. I just... 
 
Tim Wong: 
Yeah. 
 
Doria Summa: 
It was clear from the nice little 500-page document here but I 
just wanted to double check. Thank you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
And Commissioner Templeton? 
 
Cari Templeton: Thank you so much, Mr. Mayor and fellow Commissioners, for 
weighing in. I agree with the things that were relayed from our 
Ad Hoc members. I was also on the Ad Hoc Committee. And so 
that we don’t rehash what they have shared, I will add some 
learning that we had that may be helpful as the Council considers 
what to do with these sites and this plan. One of the things that 
came up was where we can go taller. Commissioner Chang 
mentioned that we might wanna go taller in certain places or we 
might wanna go denser in certain places. It's really important for 
us to maybe take some risks in certain sites that we could get 
more from so that we don’t have to constantly seek new sites. 
We don’t have unlimited sites as you all are very well aware.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
 
So we do have to in some areas where we could have a larger 
impact think about where to strategically go higher or denser. So 
I think that’s really gonna be the solution to getting the numbers 
that are required, is to really be very thoughtful and intentional 
about certain areas that are more appropriate. So areas we had 
talked about were areas near the transit center, areas near 
downtown. So that’s – those are the areas of higher opportunity 
to think about did we take enough risk here; did we go as far as 
we could in those places. And any place that we can build more, 
more densely or higher where it's appropriate kind of loosens up 
how we approach the other sites, so that we don’t have to go as 
dense in areas where it's not as appropriate. Thank you very 
much.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. And Commissioner Hechtman? 
 
Barton Hechtman: Thank you, Mayor, and good evening, Members of the Council. I 
think I wanna start by acknowledging the extraordinary efforts of 
our staff led by Mr. Wong to prepare this draft for review by the 
members of the City of Palo Alto, our residents as well as the 
elected officials and PTC. Our existing Housing Element is about 
150 pages with a 35-page or so appendix. I don’t know how many 
pages are in this new draft but it looks to be about a ream of 
paper and it's 2-sided, so it could be coming close to a thousand 
pages. And the reason it's so much larger, as Mr. Wong 
acknowledged in his presentation, is we have a remarkably more 
robust requirement from the HCD for what's required in the 
Housing Element and for staff. They haven't had 8 years to work 
on this because a lot of these requirements are newer than that. 
But for staff for have put this together and gotten it to this point, 
I think is a real achievement and I wanna applaud them for that. 
The mayor – when Mayor Burt described the PTC participation 
tonight, he was correct that we haven't had a chance to review 
as a body the Housing Element, which we have the draft.  
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
But one of the things that we were able to do as a group is 
review the – what's chapter 5 in the Housing Element, which are 
the goals, policies and programs, although, as Commissioner 
Chang mentioned, the detail in the programs, I do not think was 
available to us at the time we reviewed. But as I review this draft 
and look particularly at that chapter 5, I see the Planning 
Commission’s imprint on it and a lot of the improvements that 
we recommended were embraced by the Council and we're 
appreciative of that. And I noticed one addition I think that we 
came up with, which I think’ll be useful is in the program at the 
end of each objective you'll see references to the primary goals 
and policies that are related to that objective and so that cross-
connectivity was something that Commission thought was useful 
and staff put that together. And I do think that’s a rather 
important chapter in the Housing Element because it's really our 
roadmap for accomplishing the things that we need to 
accomplish over this next 8-year period. So I was happy that we 
could participate and contribute that as the Planning Commission 
group. I don’t have any questions of staff at this time and 
appreciate the opportunity to share my thoughts.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. So, Colleagues, at this time if you have questions that 
you’d like to direct toward Planning Commissioners or based on 
the staff presentation, we can do so. And then when we 
complete this part of the meeting, we will have a short break and 
reconvene with just the Council and hear from members of the 
public and then come back for our own deliberations and actions. 
So any questions that you have of Planning Commissioners or 
staff? Vice Mayor Kou? 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Thank you. I also wanna mention my appreciation for all the work 
that the Ad Hoc and the Planning Commissioners as well as staff, 
additionally the members of the public as well who have been 
involved in all of this, so appreciate it and thank you. It's a very 
difficult decision and to arrive at what you have arrived at today, 
so again I wanna acknowledge that. I have a question for Mr. 
Wong. The question about the builder’s remedy and 20 percent 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
of the residents are for affordable, you said 80 percent but 
doesn’t that also apply to 100 percent and 150 percent if they 
used the builder’s remedy? Doesn’t it also apply to the other 
AMIs, not just the 80 percent AMI? 
 
Tim Wong: 
Correct. I believe it's up to 100 percent for moderate if they 
propose moderate income, which is up to 120 percent AMI. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
And then... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...for the middle income, it would go up to the 150 percent AMI, 
right? So if a developer comes in using the builder’s remedy, it 
can go up to 150 percent if they have the 20 percent of their 
units or dwelling units... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...[inaudible 1:30:24]. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. Thank you, Vice Mayor. So there’s 2 ways to qualify. There 
are 2 ways to qualify for the – under the builder’s remedy as 
we've come to understand. And I wanna acknowledge that this is 
not a provision of law that’s been implemented very often in the 
state, so there’s still some learning going on with this provision. 
But as we understand, the provision to qualify, that if the project 
includes 20 percent at the 80 percent AMI level, that is one 
qualifying criteria. The other is if they did 100 percent at 120 
percent AMI, that would also qualify. So your scenario where 20 
percent is at 80 percent AMI, the rest of those units could be 
market rate.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
Okay. So the first 20 would be at 80 percent AMI and the 
remainder of those could be at 120 or 150 percent AMI? 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Jonathan Lait: 
There’s 2 different scenarios. So one scenario is I'm a developer 
and I'm gonna provide 20 percent at 80 percent AMI, that’s a 
project. Another scenario is I'm gonna provide all of my units at 
120 percent AMI. That’s another discrete option that potentially 
could be available to somebody. The 80 percent and the 120 
percent don’t mix. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
I see. And of course, looking at the AMIs, the area median 
incomes, that’s developed by County of Santa Clara and as 
income in the general area continues to rise or go higher, then 
these AMIs reduce, right? So there would be more people that – 
who are at this point, say for example at 80 percent AMI, as 
income levels go up, the AMI [adjusts 1:32:34], so now we'd have 
more people who used to be at 80 percent AMI now would fall 
into – what – 60 and so forth. So the concern now is are we 
building enough of the low and very low or even in that category 
because people are just kinda falling behind. So that’s – I'm sorry 
– a comment but a concern for me. The other thing is you 
mentioned the SOFA area and historical sites. Are historical sites 
or if they're on a list for historical, are they exempt from – are 
they not identified in this Housing Element? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So the various state laws that would seek to result in a 
development based on objective standards typically have a 
provision that excludes properties that are designated as 
resources. And so it would depend on if we're talking an SB 330 
project or some other project. But typically there’s some 
carveout for designated historic properties.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
So – okay. As long as they're on the resource list potentially but 
we would have to develop that objective standard. Is that...? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So the – right. So right now SOFA is a Coordinated Area Plan onto 
itself. It was never imbedded into the zoning code. And when we 
went through our objective standards process, we changed the 
zoning code but there’s a whole other process of hearings and 
procedures that the City has in place to amend a Coordinated 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Area Plan. That piece has not been done yet. So [FB 35 1:34:44], 
the streamlining provision, SB 330, that’s another one that calls 
for objective standards. Right now SOFA is we could only assess 
the objective standards if a qualifying SB 330 project were to 
come in. And a lot of that Coordinated Area Plan has subjective 
criteria and findings. So there’s a need to update that 
Coordinated Area Plan.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
[Can I come back 1:35:17]?  
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 1:35:18]. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Am I taking too long? 
 
Pat Burt: 
No. Go ahead.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
Okay. Thank you for that. So help me – I couldn't find it in the big 
book but are all our surface parking lots, the City’s surface 
parking lots identified for housing in this element or just how 
many of them? 
 
Tim Wong: 
Six parking lots are identified for downtown, 2 in the Cal. Ave., 
area. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Out of how m-, total how many surface parking lots do we have? 
 
Tim Wong: 
I'm not sure how many parking lots we have in the City. But we 
specifically looked at the larger ones, larger-sited parking lots and 
that’s how we came out with the 6. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
So when you're looking at the parking lots, has consideration 
been given for potential need [in 1:36:11] for staging or for – like 
what we did at California Avenue for the garage and the Public 
Safety building? We had to pay rent to somebody else to use 
their parking lot for staging. I mean are we kinda looking at 
assuring ourselves that we're not using up all of our public land 
where we would not have any more use for it in the future? As 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
one of the commissioners said, land doesn’t grow anymore and 
we don’t have enough land. But I kinda look at this like 
everything is kinda allocated into housing. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. So again, I think that the Housing Element Working Group 
and the PTC spent a fair amount of time looking at these surface 
parking lots and there was concern about having all of those sites 
be dedicated toward housing at this time and in part for what – 
the reason you just mentioned is we don’t know what the future 
holds... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Yeah. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...and what our needs and interest might be. And so there was a 
subset of those lots, I think 6 in total, that we've identified as 
potential housing opportunities. So that’s – it was intended to be 
focused in on something that is achievable and would still 
preserve our options for the other lots going forward. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Right. And just to make sure that people understand, these are 6 
surface parking lots that is for this upcoming cycle, which is the 
sixth cycle. There’s still the seventh cycle, so kinda start 
wondering how are we gonna do all of this. ROLM sites is also on 
the other side of the 101 in the – where the Baylands are. Do we 
have ROLMs on the other side of the 101? We don’t have 
[inaudible 1:38:06]. 
 
Tim Wong: 
There are no identified housing sites... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Oh, okay.  
 
Tim Wong: 
Yeah. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Very good. Thank... 
 
Tim Wong: 
...east of... 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Lydia Kou: 
...you. 
 
Tim Wong: 
...Bayshore.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
Oh, on the Housing Element, to be compliant or substantially 
compliant, does the EIR have to be also certified? Is it both the 
Housing Element and the EIR that needs to be certified or we can 
just certify the Housing Element? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So before the City Council can take action [inaudible 1:39:36], for 
the City Council to adopt, you need to have the completed 
environmental analysis. So we need to finish that environmental 
review before the City Council can take action to adopt.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
Okay. So walk me through the process. So tonight we're just 
saying review, modify, then submit to HCD? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yes.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
And when does it come back for us to adopt and to see the EIR as 
well? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Right. So the state will have up to 90 days to review the 
document at which time we would expect to get a comment 
letter from HCD noting areas where there’s some deficiencies in 
the plan. That is the case for every jurisdiction in California to 
date. So depending on those comments that we receive, we're 
gonna need to make changes to the plan. And that – and those 
changes, if they're relatively straightforward that we can 
implement, we will go first to the Planning and Transportation 
Commission because they are obligated under state law to make 
a recommendation to the City Council for the amendment to the 
Comprehensive Plan. That recommendation will come to the City 
Council. During that process, we will be completing our 
environmental review. At this point, we don’t know if it's an EIR. 
We're scoped for an EIR but it may be something else because 
we have the Comprehensive Plan EIR that we've previously 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
certified. So we'll be looking at that document and trying to 
understand the delta of changes between what was projected in 
that EIR versus what's projected in the Housing Element. And 
depending on the results of that, we will prepare the necessary 
environmental analysis to go forward. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Okay. And just one last clarifying question about the builder’s 
remedy for the 20 percent. If the developer comes in with 20 
percent of residential units that are affordable, does 150 percent 
AMI qualify as well as – when you gave the scenario of 120 
percent, does 150 percent AMI qualify as well? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
I'm not aware of any provision of what we're calling the builder’s 
remedy to – that includes 150 percent AMI. It's either 20 percent 
income restricted at 80 percent of area median income or it is a 
100 percent project, a different project altogether, a 100 percent 
project at 120 percent area median income, not more.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
Not m-, okay. I think we need to make sure about that because I 
think we need to kinda – I think the attorney’s office might 
wanna weigh in on this. But also the 100 percent of residential 
units that are affordable to moderate income household at 20 
percent AMI, that looks like AltaLocale, right?  
 
Jonathan Lait: 
No.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
No? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
That’s a different project. That was... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
[No 1:41:35]. Would that be something like what... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
No. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...AltaLocale – no. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
That would not qualify. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Lydia Kou: 
That would not qualify? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Correct. And the reason that won't – would not qualify is that 
they do not provide – that project does not provide inclusionary 
housing at 80 percent AMI [inaudible 1:41:53] and it does not 
include 100 percent of the units deed restricted at 120 percent 
AMI.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
Okay. [Inaudible 1:41:59]. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
That project is a market rate project where I think it's 20 percent 
of the units are deed restricted at a local definition of what 
Workforce Housing [has 1:42:10] local definition at 140 percent 
AMI and 150 percent AMI. And to meet the City’s Affordable 
Housing obligation, they also paid into the 15 percent fee that 
was required for that project. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Okay. Thank you for that... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Sure. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...differentiation. But can you please confirm with the attorney’s 
office about the 150 percent AMI [inaudible 1:42:37]? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Certainly will. I think we're pretty clear on it but thank you for 
that question and we'll follow up. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Council Member DuBois? 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Yeah. Hi. First of all, I also wanted to thank Jon, Tim, everybody in 
the Planning Department, the consultants, the Housing Element 
Working Committee. As been said, this has been a 19-month 
project at least at this point. And I just wanna thank everybody 
for the hard work. I have questions really about some of the new 
programs that are proposed. On the SOFA change, the goal here 
would be to have objective standards that basically implement 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 28 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
this old specific plan. I mean what is – do we have to go back? 
Are there any other old plans that we would need to do this for 
or are there any side effects of messing around with SOFA at this 
point? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Thank you, Council Member. So as far as I know and I welcome 
being corrected but I believe the SOFA plan is the only other 
Coordinated Area Plan that we have in the City. So it's – except 
for the one, of course, that we're working on for North Ventura. 
The consequences of – or actually I would say more significant if 
we do nothing because if we do nothing, the subjective criteria 
that is set forth in that plan, unless we're able to convert it to 
objective standards, will not be realized or may not be realized in 
a development proposal because they're not objective. And the 
state law, depending on if there was a qualifying project to come 
forward, requires that a developer only meet the objective 
standards. So we're feeling that we need to up-, for 2 reasons, 1) 
update the SOFA Plan so that our interests of codifying these 
subjective standards into objective standards are met. That’s one 
reason. Another reason is it helps with housing production if it is 
a more streamlined and clear process. And that’s the other 
component of why we think this is an important [inaudible 
1:45:09].  
 
Tom DuBois: 
Okay. But like the work we've already done on objective 
standards would apply? I guess you would just be looking at the 
SOFA Plan and kind of seeing if there’s any additional objective 
standards to be added?  
 
Jonathan Lait: 
I think we would tailor this next effort based on the SOFA 
standards. Otherwise and we heard a comment or maybe it was 
one of our commissioners mention we wanna capture all of the 
good work that was done with that planning initiative and not 
just unilaterally apply a set of standards that apply elsewhere in 
the City. So we would take a more tailored approach. 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 29 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Tom DuBois: 
Yeah. [But 1:45:01] we did have some other plans maybe that 
had not been adopted but things like a PTOD district? Is there 
anything subjective in those? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So that would be – yeah. We can take a look at that. That’s not a 
Coordinated Area Plan per se. It is it would fall under – most 
likely it would fall under our objective standards that the Council 
recently adopted except that in that area, we allow for greater 
height and density. And so the objective standards that were 
approved would accommodate that. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Right. Okay. Yeah. Council Member Burt or Vice – Mayor Burt 
may know about others. On the other program, the way I read it, 
it basically says that we'll comply with state laws, which we 
already do. I was wondering why we felt like we needed to add 
that program. I mean we already update all of our zoning when 
state laws change [inaudible 1:45:53]. 
 
Tim Wong: 
So thank you, Council Member DuBois. In regards to this, that 
particular program, it is more to say that we will be, if you will, 
proactive in updating it in a timely fashion at a minimum annually 
to be in compliance with state or federal law. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Yeah. But again, it feels like we do that. I just wonder if – are we 
committing ourselves – if there were a law that we felt was 
unconstitutional and the City wanted to fight it, could somebody 
say well, you're fighting it but you're also in violation of your 
housing element because you added this program? What is the 
advantage of being explicit about that versus kind of our past 
policy, which has been to be compliant with federal and state 
law? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. Understand your question and it may have a few different 
dimensions to it. And I wanna tee-up Brenna if she has some 
insight as to what HCD is looking for in that particular program. I 
will note that we don’t have an annual – we did a 1-time annual 
effort where I think we probably bit off more than we could chew 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 30 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
with what we referred to as a [on-the-bus 1:48:21] suite of 
amendments many, many years ago. And we haven't really come 
back and done that again for a variety of reasons. But what we 
do implement is – and you see this most acutely with the 
accessory dwelling unit state regulations where in that particular 
provision it invalidates the local jurisdictions ADU regulations if 
the local jurisdiction doesn’t update the standards before the 
start of the next year. So that’s kind of a unique one. And so 
that’s the one that you see and will see again in December on the 
Council’s agendas. But otherwise we amend the code as we're 
able to, not necessarily annually unless compelled to do so. 
Brenna, did you have any other insight? 
 
Brenna Weatherby: 
I mean I think just really HCD is looking for that 
commitment. So requiring that program forces the commitment 
of jurisdictions to make those changes. Palo Alto makes those 
changes on a regular basis. Not all jurisdictions do. So it was 
easier for them just to require across the board that sorta 
program rather than not requiring it and not getting that 
commitment from some of the jurisdictions that don’t follow 
through with that. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
And I don’t – the City Attorney has stepped away to provide 
visual access between the commissioners and the Council but 
when she returns could probably speak to the legal question that 
you had. I don’t believe that we would – I would think that we 
would be able to do both things if we were finding that the state 
law conflicted with some constitutional right or other assertion 
that the City might make. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Yeah. Okay. It just seems really strange. State law already 
supersedes City law when necessary and having this additional 
requirement, I'm still not clear why they're asking for that. And 
then the last one, I just wanted to get clarity on the Lot 
Consolidation Program and maybe it was just the way it was 
worded, it – are we saying that people would get the benefits 
listed there, smaller setbacks, less open space only when they do 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 31 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
a lot consolidation or – because there seem to be – I don’t know 
if you wanna pull up that side. It wasn’t clear to me the way it 
was worded if we were just giving away smaller setbacks, less 
open space. Were we requiring a lot consolidation or was that 
applying kind of across the board? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So there’s a couple of things going on. We – Tim had spoken 
about the Housing Incentive Program and that is something that 
we are working on and will need to implement in 2024 or by 
2024. We're not reliant on those numbers for RHNA per se but 
we are – have identified some of our standards as perhaps being 
a barrier to housing production. And so we wanna use the 
Housing Incentive Program to reduce or eliminate those barriers, 
which will include, I would anticipate changes to height, changes 
to setbacks and some of the things that you see noted in this 
program. And there will be a public review process before the 
Planning and Transportation Commission and the City Council, 
before anything like that would ever get implemented.  
 
 
A similar concept is looking to be employed for lot consolidation 
and there is some details that obviously still need to be worked 
out. But the – we want the property owners who own different 
lots to see that the City is – really wants to see housing here and 
that their cooperation to merge the parcels or sell the parcels or 
in partnership join the parcels to produce housing, housing that 
would be economically an incentive for them to do so, so we – if 
they consolidate, they would be subject to this. And I believe 
we're even exploring some kind of a sliding scale potentially of 
incentives based on the size of the lot or the number of lots 
consolidated. So those are some details that we'll need to sort 
through. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
So if you could pull up Slide 16. Just wanna make sure I 
understood what you just said. The Program A, Lot Consolidation, 
there’s nothing in that paragraph that says you're consolidating 
lots. Are you saying that that just applies to all lots? 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 32 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Jonathan Lait: 
So there’s 2 A’s – I apologize – on the slide [inaudible 153:56]. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
The one at the – the Proposed Program A, Lot Consolidation, the 
first paragraph. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Oh, okay. There’s 3 – actually 3 A’s.  
 
Tom DuBois: 
A lot of A’s. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Okay. So in that first paragraph, your question is is this limited to 
just consolidated lots? 
 
Tom DuBois: 
It doesn’t say. I mean the title of it is Lot Consolidation but it 
doesn’t say you get these things when you consolidate lots. It 
just... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
No. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
...says... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. We... 
 
Tom DuBois: 
...[inaudible 1:54:27]. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
That would be the intent, is that if you consolidate lots, you get 
these benefits, not just if your lot’s already 10,000 square feet, 
you don’t get these benefits. Though, there may be some zoning 
changes that we recommend based on the analysis that we're 
doing... 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Okay. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...separate from this program.  
 
Tom DuBois: 
[Inaudible 1:54:44]. Okay. Yeah. If you could just be really clear 
and I guess, like you said, it just needs a little more flushing out. 
Okay. Thank you. Those are my questions. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 33 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Pat Burt: 
Council Member Stone? 
 
Greer Stone: 
Thank you, Mr. Mayor. I had the opportunity to serve on the 
Housing Element Ad Hoc, so I had the opportunity to ask and 
have most of my questions answered through that process. But I 
have a few more questions. But first just want to again kinda 
thank staff, especially Tim. You are wonderful to work with 
through that entire process, so I thank you for breaking it down 
into simple terms, being able to work with us, answer our 
questions as well as work with the community. You took a 
process that I thought was going to be absolutely dreadful and 
turned it into a very pleasant one. So I thank you for your 
leadership on that Working Group. Was as incredible PTC. I mean 
I was like Commissioner Summa [when I thought 1:55:37] – when 
we started this activity of having to identify over 6,000 housing 
sites, I thought we had as much of a chance of identifying those 
sites as I did in getting Taylor Swift tickets, which was zero, so 
unfortunate. But we found a way to be able to identify those 
housing sites, so I think that’s really incredible.  
 
 
And in addition to identifying those sites, some of the policies 
and programs that we're putting forth have been long overdue, 
things like the Palmer Fix opportunity to be able to ensure that 
new affordable housing [inaudible 1:56:18] required to have a 
particular percentage be below market rate is going to do a lot. 
And I'm also grateful for certain things that the state is requiring 
a lotta cities to do. I think the Affirmatively Furthering Fair 
Housing clearly is going to be a challenge but it's something that 
we and others had not been doing enough for and I think this is 
an opportunity for us and the rest of the state to be able to 
address those challenges. So I think there’s gonna be a lotta good 
here. I also, of course, have my frustrations as well, which I will 
hold off until we get to more of our comments. But first I did 
wanna just thank everybody involved in this. Impressive that we 
are at this level. So just a few remaining questions. Kinda going 
back to this AMI discussion with the builder’s remedy, the one 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 34 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
thing I wanna be clear on for the AMI, do we know is that county 
AMI or is that the City AMI? 
 
Tim Wong: 
Council Member Stone, that would be county... 
 
Greer Stone: 
Okay. 
 
Tim Wong: 
...AMI. 
 
Greer Stone: 
Thank you. Then so if a city is determined to be out of 
compliance by a court – this may be a question for our City 
Attorney – I understand that the Court must then issue a 
particular remedy. They have a menu to choose from. But 
ultimately it strips a jurisdiction of local control and essentially 
permits, my understanding, all housing projects essentially by 
right. Do we know is there an affordability requirement for those 
housing projects by right under that court-issued remedy? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So maybe before Molly responds, let's – do you have the 3 
remedies? I think it's in the Staff Report. So let's go over those 3 
remedies. But I wanna preface remarks by saying long before 
that happens, I would expect that the City in consultation with 
HCD will be working toward a solution before it even got to that 
area where there is a dispute and a dispute such that we're 
dealing with this at a court level. So do you have the 3? Okay. So 
Molly’s got the 3 and I believe they are up to the court’s 
discretion.  
 
Molly Stump: 
Right. So the short answer is we’ll have many opportunities and 
we will make many efforts and we will not find ourselves in this 
position. But it is worth understanding what the consequences 
could be if we were not to do those things and that’s why we 
have clearly [inaudible 1:59:16] Staff Report. So the remedies 
that are available to the court are suspension of the authority to 
issue building permits or related permits and that can be for any 
kind of building, even including a residential remodel or an 
installment of a heat pump water heater, for example; 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 35 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
suspension of the jurisdiction’s authority to grant zoning 
changes, variances and map approvals; and then mandated 
approval of residential housing projects at the court’s discretion. 
So the court can essentially step in for the planning function.  
 
Greer Stone: 
Right. But more specifically when the – if the court were to step 
in – and I love to hear the optimism from staff that we're not 
gonna get to that point. I don’t anticipate we will. But in that 
circumstance if the court were to step in, do we know is there 
any type of affordability requirement that is a part of that? 
‘Cause I mean from here, it just looks like they strip local control. 
I think one of the things that we offer as a City, which I am not 
seeing included in much of these state offerings, is greater 
affordability requirements. Do we know are the courts going to 
remove those or require a particular threshold of that? 
 
Molly Stump: 
Right. We don’t – they're not required to... 
 
Greer Stone: 
Okay. 
 
Molly Stump: 
...and the court’s remedial authority is very broad. This initial 
what's been called the builder’s remedy, so this initial ability of a 
owner/developer to propose a project does have affordability 
requirements, which were discussed earlier... 
 
Greer Stone: 
Right. 
 
Molly Stump: 
...in response to the Vice Mayor’s concerns. 
 
Greer Stone: 
Okay. And then, Director Lait, just one final question to you. I 
know we've – I've asked this question but I think good for just 
kind of to ground us in our conversation tonight as a reminder, 
how – what percentage of the time does the state meet its 
market rate housing goals each year? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
The state or the City? 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 36 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Greer Stone: 
How about both? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
I don’t know that I can speak for the state. Brenna, I don’t know if 
you’ve got some information on that. But at the local level, the 
market rate housing, we've consistently been able to meet those 
numbers.  
 
Greer Stone: 
Great. And, Brenna, do you know for the state? 
 
Brenna Weatherby: 
I do not. I'm sorry. 
 
Greer Stone: 
No worries. I frequently heard it's about the same, that the state 
traditionally meets those targets but good to reconfirm that. And 
then as far as affordable housing targets, what do we see across 
the board? I know we don’t do well at the City level. How about 
at the state level? I guess has there ever been a year where the 
state has met its affordable housing targets? Maybe that’s the 
simpler question.  
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Probably not. But, Brenna, do you have insight.  
 
Brenna Weatherby: 
I don’t know. It's something we could do a little bit of 
research on and get back to you but I don’t know off hand.  
 
Greer Stone: 
Okay. Not a problem. Thanks. I just wanted to kind of make that 
point. I think it'll help us in our conversation [tonight 2:02:06]. 
That’s it for now. Thanks. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Council Member Filseth? 
 
Eric Filseth: 
Well I was gonna ask exactly the first question that Council 
Member DuBois did, so that’s pretty much taken care of. I did 
wanna ask on the lot consolidation issue, which it seems like 
that’s a known obstacle but there’s a lotta moving parts to 
change that. And I'm wondering – Southern California’s a year 
ahead of us and this musta come up down there. Is there 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 37 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
anything we can learn from the experience in Southern California 
about sort of mechanisms to address this? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yes. Absolutely. And we've been studying what’s been taking 
place in the SCAG region. Brenna, do you have any particular 
insight as to some specificity? I think, Council Member, it's along 
the lines of what we've articulated in the paragraph and the 
details of which we would need to sort out for the local market. 
But, Brenna, wanna give you an opportunity. 
 
Brenna Weatherby: 
I'm sorry. Can you repeat exactly the information you're 
looking for from... 
 
Male: 
Yeah. 
 
Brenna Weatherby: 
...Southern California? 
 
Eric Filseth: 
[Inaudible 2:03:16]... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Just solutions toward lot consolidations or mechanisms that have 
worked in Southern California for lot consolidation.  
 
Brenna Weatherby: 
Yeah. I mean I think the measures that the City has 
included in the Housing Element so far are what we have been 
seeing throughout Southern California and what have been 
acceptable. HCD’s really looking at trends and so if there is that 
trend of lot consolidation being used to create lots for – to 
accommodate more units, then they are – they look favorably 
towards that approach. But again, the specifics behind the 
program itself are really – what we've included here is really 
what we've included in other jurisdictions and HCD has received 
that favorably.  
 
Eric Filseth: 
All right. Thanks.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. Lemme just follow up first on a small question on that lot 
consolidation item. When we're talking about having reduced 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 38 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
setbacks and reduced lot coverage, on the one hand, I can see 
that would work very well if you – say we have existing 
multifamily neighborhoods and we wanna encourage lot 
consolidation. Currently they have setbacks between the 2 lots. 
They also have – because that side yard and setback that exists 
from lot A to lot B, they also don’t have lot coverage there. So 
that’s kind of a no-brainer to you’ve eliminated setbacks 
between those 2 halves of the property. They're now 1. You have 
greater lot coverage because you don’t have those side yard 
setbacks. But are you talking here about additional setback 
reductions that if you combine the lot it means that you don’t 
have a rear setback or a front setback like you formerly would?  
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. So what we're – potentially, I guess is the answer. And we 
don’t have the exact provisions because we're still trying to 
figure out what they are. But what we're experiencing or what 
we appear to be experiencing is the existing codes do not provide 
sufficient incentive for 2 property owners to [either 2:05:39] one 
sell or the other one or partner. So we're trying to find how we 
could make that a better – more of an incentive to do so.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. So it's not flushed out yet?  
 
Jonathan Lait: 
[Right 2:05:51]. 
 
Pat Burt: 
And this is – these are potentially knobs that you would turn but 
not necessarily ones? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
That’s right. We're looking at a variety of variables that would 
make a project work physically and 2) economically.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. Thanks. And then when we looked at the housing sites at a 
previous Council meeting, we had discussion about first that 
we've gone through this process and identified the 6,086 plus an 
extra 15 percent almost and that’s a great achievement. But we 
also had discussion on 2 other aspects of the site selection. One 
was a desirability to reconsider certain of the locations, like our 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 39 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
downtown areas, which weren't selected as sites in part because 
we’d really have to do some zoning changes to be able to 
facilitate that and incentive housing in those areas. But they're 
really desirable areas to add housing. We have to do zoning 
updates for the other – many of the other housing sites as well. 
So even though those sites are not specifically included in our 
inventory, would we need to have – provide any program 
direction tonight to further staff’s focus on including up-zoning in 
those areas? And I will add that we know that over the course of 
either the review or the ensuing years, many of those housing 
sites that we identify could run into obstacles and we'd have to 
come up with other sites to replace them. So those are additional 
reasons why moving forward with incentivizing housing in the 
downtowns still may be a good thing even if we haven't 
identified them at this point in time in our housing sites 
inventory. So what action would we need to do tonight to kind of 
further that process? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So my initial response is you probably don’t have to do anything 
right now and principally because the Comprehensive Plan Land 
Use Element already has a program to do a Downtown 
Coordinated Area Plan. So we have that on our sort of task list. It 
just hasn’t been prioritized at the moment. And in that 
Coordinated Area Plan, I'm sure we would address a number of 
issues, including housing and where housing could go. If you 
wanted to provide more direction in that regard, you certainly 
could add a program to – and we don’t have to come up with the 
language tonight, just general direction would be sufficient – to 
explore additional sites in the downtown area to – for achieve 
more housing production. So something like that and we can 
work out some language details. 
 
Pat Burt: 
That sounds good because even though it would be ideal to have 
that up-zoning and zoning changes tied to a Coordinated Area 
Plan, we have a number of perspective Coordinated Area plans. 
They're very extensive processes. We've referred to the SOFA 
Plan process and we've had more recently the NVCAP and 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 40 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
they’ve all been 2-plus years. And so I think we should recognize 
that anything that is going to be subsequent to a Coordinated 
Area Plan is in all likelihood not going to be giving us near-term 
results even if we can work to streamline that Coordinated Area 
Plan process, which I hope we will do. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Mayor? 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yeah? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Can I just add one more component? So I will also note that the 
City Council, I wanna say back in June, gave staff direction to 
apply for a grant or accept a grant for a downtown housing plan. 
And that’s an initiative where we've received a bid and we're 
gonna come back to the City Council in January. It was a 4-3 vote 
at the time to proceed on that effort. But the grant of $800,000, 
as we noted, was – it's a good grant but it may not go far enough 
to implement the plan. So the City Council in January or February 
will have a chance to decide if you wanna pursue that initiative 
and that would actually fall right into the conversation that 
you're having about focusing housing downtown. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. And then in other perspective housing sites, we have 
we did identify within the ROLM districts perspective sites which 
would need zoning upgrades to accommodate them. But we 
didn’t do anything to address facilitating housing in the Stanford 
Research Park, the 700 acres of low-density development, 0.3 to 
0.4 floor area ratio, low-density development on 700 acres when 
we say we don’t have much developable land in Palo Alto. Maybe 
you heard me say this before but I just wanna get it out there. 
And those – that Research Park is not identified as for any of the 
housing sites in the inventory, to my disappointment. But 
nevertheless, that doesn’t preclude us from having housing in 
that land over the next 8 years, especially if we have to identify 
additional housing sites because some don’t materialize. 
Currently we have a Conditional Use Permit requirement on 
housing there.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 41 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
 
That was only enacted in 2006 or 7 really because we were 
having a wave of housing at locations that hadn't been identified, 
primarily out in the East Meadow Circle area and others and 
those commercial lands that weren't near a transit that we had 
schools overflowing, all those issues. But it was added to the 
Stanford Research Park, which had historically had housing by 
right since its inception, just none had ever gotten built there. 
We certainly have to look at incompatible uses for industrial 
processes wherever we add housing, so it may not be applicable 
for all of the Research Park. But if we wanted to begin a process 
of removing the Conditional Use Permit for housing in the 
Research Park in appropriate areas, would that be added as a 
program under tonight’s discussion or what would be the process 
to do that? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. So I think – thank you, Mayor, for that question. I think I'd 
wanna take another look at our programs. I believe it would fall 
under a program as an implementation objective or action to 
rezone [RP 2:13:58] to permit housing as a permitted use as 
opposed to a conditionally permitted use. I don’t think we would 
need a full program but rather slide it in to an existing program. 
In fact, we have a program dealing with Stanford lands. We'd 
probably slide it under [that one right there 2:14:13]. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Good. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
[Inaudible 2:14:14]. 
 
Pat Burt: 
And that would only be for portions of the Research Park where 
we didn’t have incompatible uses? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
That’s right. We could include some provisions about that as 
well. And then again, just like any of these other implementing 
policies, there’s a public process, Planning Commission, City 
Council before anything would get adopted. 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 42 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. And oh, and now I'm running long. Well and lemme just 
add one other question that I'd brought up at a previous meeting 
and that’s really related to the Affirmatively Furthering Fair 
Housing or the AFFH component. And I just wanna commend the 
thorough report that’s the final segment of the element. I do 
have a number of small comments on it to just make it more 
accurate, which I can provide some of that offline. But one issue 
that I brought up before is the potential for us to have within our 
affordable housing eligibility requirements for qualification for 
the wait list basically is a preference for historically 
disadvantaged communities. And so if we wanted to include that 
within our element here, this section, would that be appropriate 
to add tonight as a program under the understanding that City 
Attorney had clarified that we'll have certain legal constraints on 
what we can and can't do there but a program within those legal 
constraints? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So yes. We do have that program dealing with AFFH and we 
would certainly consult with the City Attorney’s office and our 
consultants to develop some language that could capture the 
City’s interest. If you do wanna do that, that would be helpful to 
have that as part of a motion at the end of the evening directing 
staff to incorporate that. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. Thank you. All right. So that concludes this go-round of 
questions and our portion of the meeting with the Planning and 
Transportation Commission. I wanna thank all of them for their 
hard work on that. We're going to take a short break and then 
we'll come back and take public comments and then go into our 
deliberation and motions. So it's 7:06 and so we'll reconvene at 
7:15. [background conversation] So at this time, we will begin. 
We're reconvening the meeting. Okay. At this time, we'll open up 
comments from members of the public on Item Number 9, our 
Draft Housing Element. And let's see, we have 7 speakers so far. 
Oh, and I see it has 5 minutes [instead of 3 2:27:56]. All right. Our 
first speaker is Hamilton Hitchings to be followed by Liz Gardner. 
Welcome. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 43 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Hamilton Hitchings: 
Thank you. I'm a member of the Housing Element but this 
is – Working Group but these are my personal comments. I just 
wanted to start by giving a shout-out to Tim Wong who has led 
this process from the staff, who did a great job not only with his 
leadership but also with facilitating the conversations during our 
working groups, and also to Jonathan for providing a lot of 
insightful expertise. I have 3 comments. The first is about 
building affordable housing over parking lots. It's one of the few 
opportunities for the City to directly create very low income 
rental units in Palo Alto. The City Council passed a motion that 
said these sites need to contain 100 percent affordable housing 
but there’s no minimum percentage in the Housing Element nor 
in the RFP the City’s issuing. I understand that City Staff is 
concerned that the current density of 50 units per acre would not 
pencil out as a self-supported project and, thus, are considering 
other uses than below market housing. However, the goal is to 
attract funds for affordable housing for nonprofits, state and 
federal to complement our use of public lands.  
 
 
And not doing so would be a huge missed opportunity that 
results in less overall below market housing in Palo Alto. So I ask 
Council to please add a minimum percentage of 100 or at least 
75 percent below market housing to Program 1.4A, [allow 
2:29:39] for higher density than 50 units per acre for these 
projects and require a robust outside funding component. My 
second comment is about Stanford property at 3300 El Camino, 
which will be up-zoned to 60 units per acre for housing. Please 
do not allow them to also build office on top of that higher 
density housing as this just erases the affordability gains for this 
project. Please do this by updating Project or Program 1.5C. And 
lastly, the GM and ROLM zones near 101 and San Antonio are 
ideal sites for new housing because they are large and, thus, 
allow economies of scale while going higher has minimal impacts. 
They’re also older buildings, which are much more economically 
viable to tear down and rebuild. These sites are biking distance to 
Google. Almost all housing in Palo Alto comes from 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 44 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
redevelopment and these sites are very suitable, so please leave 
them in the Housing Element. Thank you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. Our next speaker is Liz Gardner to be followed by 
Lauren Bigelow. Welcome. 
 
Liz Gardner: 
Hi. I hope I get 10 more seconds like Mr. Hitchings did. I would 
like to, I guess, debate what Mr. Hitchings said as far as the 
ROLM District. Is he assuming everybody’s gonna be biking to 
Google in the ROLM [COM 2:31:13] industrial area? I'm really 
confused by that. So what does our service workers do for you, 
give you and your lives? Where is our City economy as it relates 
to planned and pipelined home projects? What is meant by 
“affordable”? Define please. There’s been an ask for the City 
Development Department to actually define what affordable is. 
At this point, it is a 100 and about 135 to $160,000 to rent an 800 
square foot 1 – 2B, 1 bathroom apartment on Alma. So it is 
absolutely necessary that we have a rent stabilization for the 
health and safety to guide our community grow and belong as 
active members and residents of the City. Paying 50 to 75 
percent of our income to rent is totally unacceptable.  
 
 
Taking or removing housing sites from rich transit, climate-
friendly, close to walking and shopping areas, like Fry’s site, 
which is an RM30 zoned area 30 years ago or University or Cal. 
Ave., surface City-owned parking lots, these are absolutely 
necessary to develop housing. Service workers who support the 
local high earners subsistence are getting the short end of the 
sticks. And our – there’s 4,000 homes being pushed onto a sea 
level rise, climate unfriendly, on a freeway and 1½ miles from 
schools, public transit, City services, public parks and 
playgrounds, libraries – is not the answer. ROLM COM and 
industrial are far from feasible for climate change, children, 
elderly, disabled. This site is far away from City centers on a high 
vehicle traffic areas, pollution for vulnerable populations with 
health challenges as well as no development plan for a planned 
community that connects residents to City services, which are in 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 45 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
place to serve residents. Why is the City removing wealthy, 
climate-safe areas from the City center? Service workers are very 
much living on the edge. Please address this as we move forward 
with this Housing Element. Thank you.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. And our next speaker is Lauren Bi-... 
 
Lauren Bigelow: ...and Commissioners, thank you for the opportunity to speak 
and thank you to staff for all their hard work on the Housing 
Element. My name is Lauren Bigelow and I am the Board 
President for Palo Alto Renters’ Association or PARA for short, 
which was formed in 2020 as a response to lack of renter 
representation and Palo Alto’s civic discourse. After reading 
through the demographic information and the Draft Housing 
Element, I was surprised to see the information and figure [ES5 
2:34:31] on Page 18, which showed that our renters have a 
significantly lower median income than renters across all of Santa 
Clara County, meaning that many of our renters have a higher 
need and are at greater risk of displacement than renters 
anywhere else in Santa Clara County. So I crunched some of 
PARA’S numbers. Last year, we counseled 44 individual 
households for a variety of reasons. This winter, we helped 
mitigate the mass evictions at Lane Court, which impacted more 
than 100 Palo Altans. And this year, we've counseled more than 
30 individual tenants thus far. Considering that we do this as a 
young nonprofit with a small staff and budget coupled with the 
fact that there are 11,764 renter households in Palo Alto, the 
City’s objective to educate 20 tenants and landlords annually 
seems like it is missing at least 1 if not 2 zeros.  
 
 
Educating 20 renters and landlords is less than 1 percent of 
renters alone and fewer renters than we counsel annually. 
Renters in the City deserve to understand their rights and feel 
like less of an afterthought in this planning process. While there 
were protections included in the last 3 pages of the Housing 
Element, there were no identifiable metrics or milestones about 
how these programs or policies would be achieved or even 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 46 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
definitions in terms of what these programs mean. I personally 
recognize many of these terms because I spent 2 years with the 
City studying and recommending these renter protections. But it 
should be more comprehensible for all Palo Altans and not 
require years of study to be accessible. As we think towards the 
future with the Housing Element and where these 6,086 state 
and mandated units will go, consider that many of these built 
units will be rental units, which will bring us even closer to a 
renter majority. We need to do more both to keep our renters 
housed and to build more housing so that we can follow through 
with our desire that Palo Alto be a diverse and inclusive 
community with an affordable cost of living. Thank you very 
much. And I look forward to hearing your discussion tonight. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. And our next speaker is Stuart Klein to be followed by 
Greg Schmid. Stuart Klein?  
 
Stuart Klein: 
Yes. Can you hear me now? 
 
Pat Burt: 
We can. 
 
Stuart Klein: 
Sorry. Good evening, Council Members and Staff, and thank you 
for the opportunity to speak. I'm Stuart Klein from the Campus 
for Jewish Life. The campus is the large structure on San Antonio 
Road and contains Moldaw Senior Residences and the Oshman 
Family Jewish Community Center. We urge the City to 
comprehensively plan for safety and amenities. Specifically at 
East Charleston and Fabian Way there’s a need for bicycle safety 
due to the 101 bike bridge and Castilleja High School and also for 
pedestrian safety because seniors from Moldaw walk in the 
neighborhood and many of them walk slowly and use canes. 
Thank you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. Our next speaker is Gregory Schmid to be followed by 
Bob Moss. Welcome. 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 47 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Gregory Schmid: Good evening. Why is a written and verbal response to questions 
in the Housing Element important? Because Packet Pages 98, 99 
state clearly the questions formally submitted by tonight will 
receive a written response from the City and possibly HCD. PAAS 
has raised 5 written questions. [The basic] [inaudible 2:39:05]. 
They concluded that aggressive concentrated jobs and housing 
growth in already jobs-rich areas, like Silicon Valley, was to be 
the basis of their forecast. Be explicit in how the world has 
changed dramatically since then. 2) Note the state has ruled 
there could be no public discussion of reducing job growth during 
the 8 years of the housing cycle. Will this affect compliance goals 
of business, builders, owners? 3) There is no written commitment 
of the 3 biggest gainers from concentrated job growth – big 
businesses, state government and Stanford – to pay their fair 
share of affordable housing and infrastructure costs. What share 
will residents pay of these affordable housing and infrastructure 
costs? 4) Clearly concentrated housing near jobs means less 
family housing. Put out an annual list of the share of new housing 
that’s 2 bedrooms or more. Finally, HCD threatens to override 
local zoning control and reduce participation of local citizens in 
decision-making to protect the financial interest of the state and 
businesses. Why? Please make sure that the Housing Element is 
explicit in protecting local participation of citizens in their 
government. Thank you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. Our next speaker is Bob Moss to be followed by 
Mohamed Chakmakchi. Welcome. 
 
Bob Moss: 
Thank you, Mayor Burt and Council Members. One aspect of 
housing in Palo Alto that seems to be overlooked is the hundreds 
of existing vacant housing units. And lemme give you some 
examples. There are 2 on [Oram 2:41:48], 4025 and 4045, which 
have been vacant for more than a year. 778 Los Robles has been 
vacant for more than a year. And there are dozens more in 
Barron Park I can identify in Ventura. So there are 3 options we – 
I think we have for addressing all those vacancies. One of’m is 
count them against our housing mandate. They're housing. We're 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 48 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
supposed to be providing housing. The housing is there. It's not 
being used. Let's count it. Second, as some cities in Santa Clara 
County have already done, fine the property owners who have 
left these properties vacant for more than a year. I'd say a 
minimum of $250 or $500 a month and after a year double it. 
The third option is we have some surplus in the City’s budget.  
 
 
We might be able to buy some of these housing units and do 2 
things with’m. Resell them to market rate or use them as housing 
for our unhoused people that we are looking for places to put 
right now. But if we're going to properly look at the housing 
issues in Palo Alto, we should look at every aspect of not just 
building new ones but using the ones which have been in 
existence and basically ignored by their property owners for 
years. They're there. They're assets. We should use them. 
Another thing we can do, of course, is to build housing on the 
upper floors of retail, as an example. It's a nice thought but it 
hasn’t worked very well. In 1975, when the El Camino Design 
Guidelines were adopted, we said we’d put housing on the upper 
floors of retail. In the 45 years since then, only about a dozen 
such units have been built. That’s inadequate. I think we should 
do more to build housing on upper floors of retail. Thank you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. Our next speaker is Mohamed Chakmakchi to be 
followed by Amie Ashton. Welcome. 
 
Mohamed Chakmakchi: Hi. Thank you very much. My name is Mohamed. I am a 
local teacher. I've been teaching here in the Bay Area for about 
17-18 years mostly in Palo Alto and in Mountain View-Los Altos. 
And I'm really interested in the work of the Council and what you 
guys are doing in terms of renter protection first of all. And as 
someone who’s in education, we have a pretty tough job. We 
serve our communities and we make sure that the kids are 
learning. And it doesn’t just happen because we have magic fairy 
dust that we carry around. We go – we carry – we work by 
putting up milestones, metrics, really focusing on when things 
are actually gonna get done, setting dates, who’s gonna do it, 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 49 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
how’s it gonna get done. And these are very, very detailed plans 
that we create in order to make sure that your children get the 
education they deserve. The State of California has said Palo Alto 
needs to do some things and I'm concerned because it just feels 
really wavy gravy, like I'm not seeing – like where’s the hard 
data? Like when is this stuff gonna come out? What are your 
decisions? It seems like just very gray and nebulous and that to 
me is very concerning. I can tell you in public education, that 
kinda stuff just wouldn't fly. It just wouldn't work.  
 
 
Your kids wouldn't get an education. The other thing I wanted to 
mention is I'm really, really interested in seeing more housing in 
this area. Last year, as a teacher here working in Greene Middle 
School, we lost our housing in the middle of the school year. The 
landlords did not care. And Project Sentinel sadly did not know 
the law and I had to find a private – I had to pay for a lawyer to 
tell their lawyer, oh, you're breaking the law. And then I was able 
to stay for a few more months and because of the grace of God 
and the help of PARA, I was able to find housing. Otherwise I was 
looking at living out of my van, which is a really tough thing to do 
when you're teaching students. And so I really, really hope that 
you guys take seriously the idea that more housing needs to go 
up and it needs to be focused on – well. Let me back up. A big 
focus on that should be on protecting the people who are serving 
your community and so I just – with that, I think you. I know 
you're all doing your best and you're doing hard work. I do hope 
that, like I said, that we can get more specific information so that 
this whole process just – it just doesn’t feel very transparent for 
me. Thank you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. We're now going to be closing public comments. Our 
next speaker is Amie Ashton to be followed by Emily Ann Ramos. 
Welcome. 
 
Amie Ashton: 
Honorable City Council, Staff and Committee Members, I'm very 
excited to see Palo Alto outline concrete steps toward providing 
additional much needed housing. As a professional planner 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 50 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
myself, I understand the amount of work, compromise and late 
nights involved in getting this Draft Housing Element across the 
finish line. So we should applaud that. I'm speaking tonight as an 
individual but am working collaboratively through Palo Alto 
Forward with a group of local citizens to prepare a 
comprehensive comment letter on the Draft Housing Element. 
We all want to see Palo Alto succeed in its lofty and difficult goal 
to build over 6,000 housing units in 8 years. Our group fully 
supports the policies that aggressively promote construction of 
new housing units and we will continue to support Council and 
staff as the Housing Element is implemented and sites are 
rezoned to accommodate these actual units. As Mohamed just 
mentioned, that’s where the difficult work is actually done and 
where we need to focus on efforts – excuse me – focus our 
efforts. The Draft is just a start of making Palo Alto a stronger, 
more equal, more sustainable community. I'm excited to see this 
through the process. Thank you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. Our next speaker is Emily Ann Ramos to be followed 
by Winter Dellenbach. Welcome. 
 
Emily Ann Ramos: Thank you. Can you hear me? 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yes, we can. 
 
Emily Ann Ramos: Wonderful. Mayor Burt and Honorable Council Members, my 
name is Emily Ann Ramos with Silicon Valley At Home. We plan 
on submitting a more comprehensive letter. [Silicon Valley At 
Home 2:49:14] was proud to be a partner with the City in the 
partnerships for the Bay’s future grant for the last 2 years where 
together we undertook significant work on exploring tenant 
protections that meet the needs of your residents. This work is 
referenced on Page 5-37 or Program 6.6, Fair Housing, Section G. 
We support this section. But we believe that the City should 
provide a more in-depth timeline for these policies as the City 
has already started on building these policy details thanks to the 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 51 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
extraordinary work by the staff and the leadership of this 
Council.  
 
 
You have already done significant work to set up plans and 
metrics for these policies, such as the Tenant Relocation 
Assistance, which you passed earlier this year; Eviction Reduction 
Program; the Rent Survey, we're going through that through the 
Policy and Services Committee right now; Security Deposit Limit; 
Fair Chance Ordinance; and the Right to Counsel. The time frame 
given as begin implementation December 2023 does not reflect 
the work that you have already done and we believe that you 
deserve credit for that work. So we ask that you put a more in-
depth timeline and the metrics that you have already started 
gathering for the Housing Element. We look forward to working 
with you to take these policies to the finish line. But we thank 
you for your leadership on tenant protections and believe that 
you should really take what you have done and put it into the 
Housing Element so you could get proper credit for that. So thank 
you so much for your time. I look forward to seeing what Council 
does tonight. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. Our next speaker is Winter Dellenbach to be followed 
by Penny Ellson.  
 
Winter Dellenbach: 
Hi. Thank you all for your good work on this. I agree with 
Hamilton Hitchings. Right into the housing – into this element, 
the City-owned sites, such as parking lots, should only be used 
for 100 percent BMR projects. We just heard tonight from staff 
that our City consistently meets its market rate housing goals. It’s 
affordable housing that we need. It would be a shame to 
squander City-owned sites for the Housing Element on mostly 
market rate housing. It's nothing new to any of us here that 
developers say oh, something won't pencil out. We need to set 
aside these sites, groups, nonprofit developers, such as ALTA 
Housing and with our increased impact fees going into our 
Affordable Housing fund, hopefully can build what we actually 
need in this town, which is affordable housing. And these sites 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 52 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
should not be just given to – or not given to – but the market rate 
developers build on this site. And you have to write it in or it's 
just gonna go through our fingers like sand. So please do that and 
ensure that we're using these sites properly. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. Our next speaker is Penny Ellson to be followed by 
our final speaker Aram James. Welcome. 
 
Penny Ellson: 
[Thank you 2:52:54]. Can you hear me? 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yes, we can. 
 
Penny Ellson: 
Thank you. I'm Penny Ellson speaking as an individual. I just 
wanna say first of all that I appreciate the – and noticed the City’s 
request to VTA for transit service planning on the San Antonio 
Road corridor. I think that will help with the housing that’s 
planned in that area but it's not enough. And I want to say – I 
wanna add my voice to the earlier speaker who asked for bicycle 
and pedestrian improvements to the San Antonio corridor. This is 
gonna be necessary if you're putting housing on the south side of 
that corridor. Children are gonna need to get to school. Families 
are gonna need to get to community services, which are on the 
other side of the road and they're not always gonna be able to do 
that with cars. [coughing] Excuse me. Sorry. This new level of 
density was not envisioned in any comprehensive plan to date 
and so this part of town is extremely ill-equipped to support it. 
An area plan is absolutely needed. I wonder what will happen 
with the traffic that is going to be generated by all this housing 
when grade separation construction occurs.  
 
 
We've had lengthy discussions at the City Council Rail Committee 
about grade separation, traffic studies. We're already – a couple 
of the options already showed intersections are gonna 
completely fail. I just wanna understand if this housing needs to 
be incorporated in the traffic studies for these major projects 
that are moving forward in roughly the same time period. So we 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 53 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
need to be thinking about what we're doing here more 
holistically for South Palo Alto. And I guess for the moment, I 
think those are the 3 things. Oh, and one last thing is Cubberley. 
The City has been not taking action on Cubberley for a very, very 
long time and clearly there is going to be – if we're adding this 
level of housing to San Antonio corridor, there’s clearly going to 
be increased demand for community services. People who live in 
small spaces need recreational spaces even more than people 
who live in single-family homes. We are going to need to 
redevelop Cubberley in short order, so let's get on it and that 
should be part of the area planning process. Thank you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. And our final speaker Aram James.  
 
Aram James: 
Thank you, Mr. Mayor. So I know that you were talking about 
putting in language that talked about set aside housing in the 
general – in the Housing Plan but using the word historically 
disadvantaged. That really bothers me. You remember the award 
that you spearheaded for Bob Hoover from East Palo Alto, who – 
the golf program for youth. He’s been working there for like 25 
years and now in his late 80s. He wasn’t historically 
disadvantaged. He told you he got a master’s degree at Stanford 
in about 1968 and he came over to Palo Alto to try to buy 
housing here. He's a black man, very accomplished individual. 
You made sure he had an award. So I think that’s the wrong 
term. These were historically intentionally deprived of housing, 
redlined out of areas based on their skin color, straight up 
racism. So I think, Mayor Burt, I know you're on the same page 
with me on this but don’t be afraid to offend some people by 
using the real language. This City has promoted segregation.  
 
 
We need to do a certain percentage. And I think 20 percent at 
least of the Housing Plan, the Housing Element for African 
Americans, another 20 percent for other people of color that 
have been treated by this City in a despicable fashion, the 
redlining, the restrictive deeds, all of that. And to use historically 
disadvantaged, that’s just not what it was. It's been intentional, 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 54 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
purposeful discrimination just like this police department in the 
City of Palo Alto, same thing. We don’t have equality in any of 
the major services. We've got to come to grips with the racism 
and you can do it by making this Housing Element – also I believe 
that the school teachers and I do think people put in plan. I mean 
Greer Stone, look at the amazing thing he does. [Two adult 
2:57:48] school teachers. He’s on the City Council and he found 
time to be on the Housing Element. He can talk to the metrics 
that Mohamed might not think went into this discussion.  
 
 
I don’t think it's a lack of effort. I just think you folks are not 
dealing with the reality of racism in this culture. We've gotta shift 
the culture. You can do it by housing people. That’s a huge 
priority. Let's bring back the black population that’s been sent 
out. Let's – pushed out of this community. Let's make sure that 
the cops have to live in Palo Alto and housing here so they're part 
of the community, service workers, the teachers, all of that sort 
of stuff. And if we don’t have that into that plan, well God bless 
us. Thank the Post for putting out that piece on the builder’s 
remedy. That’s what we're gonna be facing if we don’t put this 
kind of planning into it for equality for all in the housing and 
forget the market housing – the market rate housing. The Post 
piece says we did not approve 1 low-income house this year 
permitted for very low-income housing. That we should be 
ashamed of. Okay. Thank you much. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. So that concludes our public comments. And we'll 
now return to the Council for discussion and I suspect we'll have 
a fair amount of additional questions in discussion before moving 
forward to motions. So who would  like to go first? Vice Mayor 
Kou. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
I guess I will. I was noticing in this Housing Element there were – I 
think that we should add in to this Housing Element the Auditor 
of the State of California when it issued the Regional Housing 
Needs Assessment Audit. I think that should be included in to 
Chapter 2 when it goes in to the Regional Housing Needs 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 55 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Assessment. The other thing is the – in the 6-cycle RHNA, there 
were inaccuracies as to the number of housing units needed. In 
2019, McKinsey & Company threw out the need for 3.5 million 
housing units by 2025. They used the wrong housing model. And 
I think that there is a debate on that where Embarcadero 
Institute had issued a report analysis about that. And I think that 
that should be something that should be added in there because 
it does convey that there has been wrong analysis and also 
housing figures that were just put out and using wrong models. 
The other thing that supported the Embarcadero Institute’s 
research paper was Freddie Mac’s research and perspective 
paper highlighting that the entire United States housing shortage 
number to be between 2.5 million to 3.3 million and that is the 
housing supply shortage.  
 
 
Their paper is called The Housing Supply Shortage: State of the 
States – Freddie Mac. So I think that is another collaborating 
document to the Embarcadero Institute’s document that should 
be also added in to the Housing Element. The other document 
that I think that should be put in there in order to have all the 
facts in this report is the Department of Finance’s California 
population, which has declined by 173,000 persons between July 
1, 2020 and July 1, 2021. And that is actually another report. It’s 
E2 – California County Population Estimates and Components of 
Change by Year. Another report by the Embarcadero Institute is 
the double counting in the latest housing needs assessment. That 
should be included due to Senate Bill 828. It was also a bill that 
was cosponsored by the Bay Area Council and Silicon Valley 
Leadership Group, all advocates for the tech company and big 
business. This is all just to raise the count, the numbers for the 
housing need and it's inaccurate. So I believe that those are some 
of the documents that should be added. The other thing I also 
wanted to add in there is in October 2022, this year, a study 
session in San Jose, which shows the cost of residential 
development in San Jose, so they’ve actually had a study session.  
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 56 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
They had a report done and it shows and confirms that for multi-
residential for – to build a unit, it will cost almost 800,000 in 
order to do so. So I guess what I'm looking at is where is the 
money? All of these mandates, including this Housing Element 
that the state is forcing or HCD is forcing onto cities is actually 
unfunded. And I hear people talking about public and private 
partnerships. When it comes down to it, in order for a affordable 
housing to be built here in Palo Alto, like Wilton Court, money 
from the City was put forward. So not to acknowledge that in this 
report just does not let HCD or legislators know that it's a 
impossible task. It's a impossible task to build housing and 
developers are not gonna want to build below market rate 
because it doesn’t pencil out for them. And even with the market 
rate, they're not – they're still asking for higher density. Building 
more forced up-zoning also results in the need for higher levels 
of services, everything from police, fire to park rangers and 
librarians, everything and the state is not providing the funding 
for these incremental costs either.  
 
 
So I think that the City should be looking to make sure that we 
recoup all that costs and take legal action to force the state to 
pony up. Without subsidies, we give out an – especially since the 
redevelopment funding and the Great Recession, the state does 
not have funds needed to fulfill even the RHNA Affordable 
Housing goals. The Sixth Cycle RHNA goal is 1 million new 
affordable housing units in the next 8 years, a cost of 800,000 
each. The total bill will be 800 billion. Even with widely optimistic 
assumptions, this cost cannot be reduced enough to be realistic. 
Like I said, where is the money coming from? The governor 
reports that there was a 97-plus billion surplus. Of the state’s 
total 308 billion budget, only 2 billion has been appropriated for 
housing investment and that is 1 billion for homelessness and 1 
billion is for shelter. Where’s the money for housing? But just this 
week in the CalMatters reports in the summary that California’s 
projected 97.5 billion budget surplus have failed to materialize 
and the state now faces at least a 25 billion deficit and it will 
require major adjustments to the budget.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 57 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
 
So where’s the money? And then the governor by signing SB 330 
declares a statewide housing crisis and for a 5-year period 
freezing nearly all development-related fees once a developer 
submits a preliminary application, including essential project-
specific fees. So it freezes fees. It does not allow us to access 
these fees or even to look at new fees even for affordable 
housing. So again where is the money? I also wanted to say in the 
presentation that we received tonight, one of the programs says 
to send this plan to the water suppliers. So when it comes down 
to it, even with water shortages, we're supposed to build even 
more and so raising costs for most of the people who need to use 
the water. I mean there’s flaws in this plan and not with you 
guys, not the staff. No. You guys are all kinda put on a really 
difficult path by what the state is mandating. So I wanna submit 
that I would like to see these reports included in to this Housing 
Element just so that we have record here. Thank you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. Council Member Stone? 
 
Greer Stone: 
Thank you, Mr. Mayor. Yeah. I wanna kinda follow up on some of 
the points that the vice mayor was making and it's [inaudible 
3:07:53]. I find it really absurd that most jurisdictions are not 
receiving certification after their second review and because of 
this, my understanding is HCD is even recommending 
jurisdictions plan for a third review and that’s just insanity to me. 
I mean I think the state has created a system where cities are 
destined to fail and we're looking at Southern California as an 
example. They’ve – 61 percent of cities in LA County are out of 
compliance. That’s a 61 percent fail rate. I mean as a teacher, if I 
administered a test with a 60 fail rate and I expected my students 
to have to take that test 3 times in order to pass, that’s not a 
failure on them. That’s a failure on me. This is clearly a failure on 
the state. So I think if the state is serious in addressing housing, 
as the vice mayor was discussing, they would adequately fund it. 
California is about to become the fourth largest economy in the 
world. What a shocking statistic that is and something I think we 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 58 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
can all be proud of but the fact that out of a $307 billion budget 
and a $100 billion surplus, $1 billion goes towards affordable 
housing production – I mean don’t get me wrong.  
 
 
I'm really grateful for the money that we have received, 
especially for Project Homekey. I mean that project – the funding 
for that project was critical. It's making that project feasible. But 
just imagine what we could do if we had more. I mean if I'm 
starvin’ and you offer me a slice of bread, I'll take it but if you're 
sitting there on a king’s feast and that’s all you offer me, is a slice 
of bread, that’s insulting. It's immoral. And that’s essentially what 
the state is doing. They are offering a slice of bread to 
communities that are dying for affordable housing and they're 
not giving it to us. Where we spend our money reflects our 
values. Clearly our state is not seriously attempting to address an 
affordable housing crisis. And what they're doing is they're 
placing the blame and the onus on cities to be able to create that 
affordable housing. Now, do cities share in the responsibility to 
create housing? Of course. And can Palo Alto do better? Yes and 
we must do better. And I'm hopeful that this Housing Element 
and a lot of the policies that we're gonna be discussing tonight is 
gonna be able to help us address that, things like [renter 3:10:30] 
policies, etc. But just as a practical matter, Palo Alto cannot 
create 3,500 affordable housing units in the next 8 years on our 
own.  
 
 
And I think as policymakers we deal with the world as it is, not 
how we wish it were and we simply don’t have the money to 
construct the amount of affordable housing that the state is 
requiring. And if we simply rely on market rate housing, which 
seems to be the state’s kind of disjointed strategy here through – 
and we were to do that simply through inclusion area zoning, we 
would have to construct 20 to 22,000 new housing units in the 
next 8 years. That’s almost doubling our current housing stock. 
So would we all be better served if the state acted as a partner in 
solving the affordable housing crisis? Absolutely. I think rather 
than continuing to pass just additional unfunded mandates that 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 59 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
really do nothing to make housing more affordable, so I think the 
state needs to get onboard and all of us communities have to 
recognize what is the true crisis here. Is it a market rate or crisis 
or is it an affordable housing crisis? And as Director Lait pointed 
out, Palo Alto, we meet our market rate housing numbers every 
year. I'm sure the state does as well. We have never met our 
affordable housing targets nor has the state. That is where the 
true crisis is. I mean I could look around my own apartment 
complex. There are several vacant 1- and 2-bedroom apartments 
but they haven't been rented out in months. Why?  
 
 
You look at how much they're charging for those units and it is an 
absurd amount. And so I think that’s where the real problem is. 
Of course, market rate production is going to be a tool in getting 
us there. But I think the state is not taking serious the amount of 
money that’s gonna be required in order to be able to get us out 
of there and we as Palo Alto can't do enough. One real question – 
sorry – on – after that rant – I think there’s confusion in the 
community maybe about kind of the policies that are identified in 
this long report. And if you're just reading the policy, it seems 
very scarce. It's not fully detailed. Can staff kind of explain sorta 
what this document is intended to show and where that detail is? 
I mean, for example, under Tenant Protections on Page 537, lots 
of concerns in the community as there should be. This is one of 
those areas where we have to be able to do better. And it just 
has a few – it says institute tenant protections to prevent anti-
displacement, including the following: Relocation Assistance, 
Eviction Reduction Program, etc. That doesn’t give the 
community much information. Can you maybe kinda talk through 
the process how these policies are being developed and will be 
robust policies when they're actually implemented? 
 
Tim Wong: 
Thank you very much, Council Member Stone. In regards to the 
policies, they are policies so they are – they generally supposed 
to be a little vague but with the purpose and intent that these 
programs will help carry out the policy. So in regards to greater 
clarity or transparency on some of these actions, we can tease 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 60 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
out – for example, using the tenant protections, we don’t have to 
put it as 1 implementing objective or action per se. To get more 
detail, to provide more information to the consumer, if you will, 
we can tease those out even more and provide a little more 
description about, for example what is a Fair Chance Ordinance 
or those type a things if there is this perception that there’s 
confusion out in the community. We can certainly do that.  
 
Greer Stone: 
Great. Thank you. And just kind of a quick follow-up to this, can 
you just respond to some of the community comments ‘cause I 
thought that was a bit concerning to me as well, this idea that a 
goal of Program 6.7 was reach at least 20 households annually 
through work with Human Services. That does seem to be a very 
small number for 46-47 percent of our community being renters.  
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Council Member, which number? 
 
Greer Stone: 
Program 6.7. It's on Page 5-38. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
[Inaudible 3:15:25]. So I see and it’s Implementation Objective A. 
 
Greer Stone: 
Yep. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. We can take a look at that. It's not obvious by the way 
that’s written right now but I think it might be tied to funding 
that we receive and it might be what we've traditionally done 
with those funds year after year. So let us take a look at that and 
see if we can clarify that.  
 
Greer Stone: 
Okay. I'd appreciate it and I appreciate the members of the public 
who brought that up ‘cause – yeah – that seems like a very, very 
small number. It would be great if only that amount required 
help but I don’t think that is the case. So thanks for some of 
those clarifications. And that’s all I have for now. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Council Member DuBois? 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 61 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Tom DuBois: 
Yes. So first of all, thanks to the public speakers. We had some 
good points there. And again, we've worked on this for 19 
months. There's been a lot of public participation. There’s been 
15 meetings of the Working Group, 8 meetings of the Ad Hoc, 
multiple community meetings, PTC meetings and as well as 
speakers pointed out, it seems like we have a thousand page 
Housing Element. And so I mean there were a few comments 
that the process wasn’t transparent or detailed enough. I think 
we've done what we could. I think it's been pretty extensive and I 
do hope people will read this Housing Element, at least read the 
Executive Summary. And I guess for the Council, I think it's really 
critical that we get this new element in place. This is the final 
step in what's been a long process. And I think there’s probably 
pieces of this document that we'd all like to change but I would 
suggest we should probably just view this as a work in progress 
more than other parts of our comp plan. This things tends to 
morph.  
 
 
I mean when I think back about how many changes we've made 
in the last 8 years, under the previous Housing Element, we've 
continued to add incentives and modify our housing ordinances 
in ways that I don’t think we contemplated 8 years ago when we 
wrote the previous element. So I would just put that out there – 
that we should expect this thing will morph over time and we 
should get it in place. In the Executive Summary, it states the 
goals [to meet 3:18:07] housing needs of all Palo Alto residents 
through 2031. And as Council Member Kou and Stone kinda 
pushed on already, we have some really steep challenges to do 
that. We are a global destination with global demand and it's 
really driving very high incomes, which is driving high housing 
costs. And I wanna go back. I appreciated the comments of the 
PTC Chair, Ed Lauing, when he started with really having a duty to 
look at providing real housing for real people with a quality of life 
versus kinda this central planning from the state.  
 
 
And we do need the state government to release funds for 
homelessness for affordable housing and [now 3:19:00] the 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 62 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Council needs to make sure we maintain a balanced City, places 
for businesses and housing. We need some light industrial. We 
need retail. We need R&D space, open space. And finally, I think 
we need to protect our right to self-determination as a City under 
the City Charter and we need – that’s kinda the challenge for the 
Council. In terms of market factors, I think one of the things that 
was missed in this summary was really the rise of these mega 
companies that really have had explosive growth. [And 3:19:40] 
I'm talking about Apple and Meta and Google, Amazon. There’s 
kind of a passing reference to the internet boom of the 1990s but 
– and again I know it's just a summary but I'd ask staff maybe to 
go back and take a look. I think the significance of that high-
income job growth really can't be overstated. And I do think if we 
look at how we're gonna fund the solution.  
 
 
We are gonna have to tap additional sources and that’s likely to 
be the higher taxes on some of these mega companies. We're 
also facing real market constraints right now with inflation and 
mortgage rates and it seems like the state is not gonna ease up 
on any of these goals even though the construction industry may 
not be constructing. So I kinda have a question for Molly. I mean 
it seems like we may be going to kind of an unprecedented 
situation where cities are doing their damndest to get housing 
elements approved and get – 40 to 50 percent of the cities are 
being rejected. And then we've heard about all kind of legal 
jeopardy we could be in without having an element. But this 
seems really like unprecedented. It the past, it seemed like cities 
were late and they didn’t file their housing elements more on 
purpose but this seems to be cities trying to comply. I mean do 
you have any comments on how you think that’s gonna play out 
or how some of these penalties would apply when a city’s making 
a good faith effort. 
 
Molly Stump: 
Right. It's definitely different this time. So I guess I wouldn't 
necessarily characterize what's going on in Southern California as 
elements being rejected but they're being returned with 
comments and the iterative process... 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 63 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Tom DuBois: 
[Yeah 3:21:47]. 
 
Molly Stump: 
...is continuing for a longer period than I think those cities had 
hoped. And so I guess you directed your question to me with the 
thought that isn't there something that the legal system can offer 
here in terms of redress. And there’s a structure to the process 
that allows for very limited, actually, points for challenges and 
feedback. And I think the City did a really good job of responding 
to those structured points. And we find ourselves where we find 
ourselves and obviously we're not alone. So I think really it's – at 
this point, it's about working with the State Legislature and 
looking forward to the next Housing Element in ways that the 
process might be refined, arguments that might be made about 
how that process can evolve for the next cycle.  
 
Tom DuBois: 
Yeah. Appreciate that. 
 
Molly Stump: 
I know it's not very satisfying. It's the best I've got for you 
tonight. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Yeah. No. I get it. It just feel like a strange situation when you're 
looking at potential penalties when you're doing your best to 
pass an element. There’s another point in the Executive 
Summary I think it's worth mentioning is that Palo Alto has really 
long been a leader in affordable housing. We're still number 2 in 
the county – Santa Clara County in terms of affordable housing 
per capita. And I was really looking at a lot of the tables about 
the burden rate. And again, we do have very high incomes and 
very high housing costs with an overall 34 percent of the 
households being burdened under the definition of spending 30 
percent or more of their income on housing. And again, it's not 
really for tonight but I think it’d be good to understand how even 
the highest income levels how many people are housing 
burdened when it – perhaps it's even more of a choice. Are 
people spending more on housing when they have an option to 
spend less? And I wanna flip gears now and go back. I think, 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 64 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Molly, you were out of the room when I was asking about the 
new program that basically says we agree to comply with state 
laws. HCD, I guess, is asking for this kinda program. It's making 
me uncomfortable because we already have an obligation to 
comply with state law. And my question was [along 3:24:33] we 
were going through a legal process, would they say well, you also 
have this other commitment that you said you were gonna 
comply with all the laws. [What 3:24:42]... 
 
Molly Stump: 
I don’t think – yeah. I don’t think... 
 
Tom DuBois: 
[Why 3:24:43]? What's the [inaudible 3:24:44]? 
 
Molly Stump: 
Right. So I heard the consultant respond on that. I was actually 
sittin’ in the back during that part of the conversation. I think 
Palo Alto’s pretty rule abiding and so when we need to amend 
our laws to comply with state law, we do that. But I heard her say 
that that’s not the consistent process throughout the state. And I 
think these things are not automatically self-executing, so my 
guess is that the state is looking for all the tools it can get to kind 
of gain a higher level of compliance, including other jurisdictions 
that are not as careful to understand their obligations and 
respond to them as we are. I don’t think that it cuts us off from 
challenging something that we believe violates, say our home 
rule authority or is illegal for some other reason. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Okay. Well and my colleagues have heard me. I'm curious what 
they think. It feels like we're being asked to do something that 
we already do and – or expected to do. I think the other thing 
that struck me as a thread to this Housing Element is we have 
this [new aspect 3:25:55] of private employee/employer housing 
with Stanford University restricting usage to a large number of 
units to its own employees. And I think we should move forward 
with this element but it's something we may want to think about. 
Like [if we 3:26:11] really want that to continue. How would we 
feel if it was Google-only housing or Facebook-only housing as 
part of our Housing Element? And then the last comment I have 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 65 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
right now is that I do support the idea that the City property 
[inaudible 3:26:30] should be used for below market rate housing 
and if we're not doing that, I really think we should change and 
do that going forward in terms of [these] [inaudible] [fees 
3:26:39]. Thanks. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. I'll go ahead and wade in. First question: Throughout the 
report we – especially in the AFFH section, there's a lotta 
references to the 2016 through 2020 – I forget what's – the 
survey that’s done. What's that called? The ACS. Yes. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. 
 
Pat Burt: 
But I didn’t see any reference to the current census data. Is there 
a reason that they used that survey, which is less contemporary 
than perhaps the census data is? 
 
Tim Wong: 
I'll defer to our consultant, to Brenna to respond to that 
question. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. 
 
Brenna Weatherby: 
I'd have to go back and look as to why that is. It was likely 
just when we prepared the documentation that not all of the 
census data was available. We made a number of updates late in 
the process to incorporate the latest census data that was 
available but that may be just be one spot where it did not get 
changed.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Well I think it's more than one spot that it – I saw numerous 
spots where it looked like it wasn’t updated where the census 
data’s more contemporary. So... 
 
Brenna Weatherby: 
That’s... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yeah. 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 66 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Brenna Weatherby: 
It's definitely something that we can look at to see if the 
data is available for those portions. But with my recollection, we 
– the data that was most readily and easily available at the time 
that those sections were prepared is what is used and 
referenced. If the – like I mentioned, if the data wasn’t available 
at the time those sections were prepared – we go through a 
process where we prepare the sections, they get reviewed, we 
make edits, so it may just have been that those sections were 
prepared earlier than others. But it's definitely something that 
we can take a look at and make sure – we'll make sure that the... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yeah. I... 
 
Brenna Weatherby: 
...most up-to-date information is included before the 
[draft] [inaudible 3:29:03]. 
 
Pat Burt: 
I don’t know when they were prepared but the census data I'm 
familiar with that stood out to me has been available throughout 
this year. So I'll leave it at that. And then I did wanna note that in 
the introductory section it was great that there was added some 
listing on Palo Alto’s not only past historic – or Historic 
Affordable Housing Record but our current pipeline but it 
referenced several Affordable Housing projects [in 3:29:52], for 
instance – but it omitted others in the pipeline. So I don’t see the 
– there’s no reference to the Wilton Court Project – yeah. None 
that I can see on the Wilton Court Project that is just opening. I 
don’t see anything on the 525 Charleston Project that’s 50 units. 
And each of those actually have relevance for the AFFH programs 
in part because they preferentially served developmentally 
disadvantaged adults and that’s a population that needs 
particular care. It doesn’t reference the Grant Avenue Teacher 
Housing Project, 110 units. We had teachers speak tonight and 
we – not everybody’s aware of these things and [it 3:31:10] being 
left off there.  
 
 
And even on the Buena Vista Mobile Home Park, [it said 3:31:18] 
preserved mobile home units but it did more than that. It went 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 67 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
from units that were market rate non-deed restricted but 
affordable to deed restricted affordable projects and that’s an 
important difference. Next I wanted to touch base on what we 
talked about earlier on all of the requirements that staff’s going 
to have to update the Comprehensive Plan this coming year, 
numerous zoning changes, which each of them have to go 
through significant process and then our multiple Coordinated 
Area plans that we'd be beginning and have on the horizon. And I 
know from over the past 2 years or so that having adequate staff 
capacity to do a number of the things that we wanted to do [to 
do 3:32:19] really good planning that looks at how we not only 
add housing but we build communities and services that support 
those new residents, I don’t understand where we have staff 
capacity to accomplish all this. So is that an additional need that 
we need to recognize and... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. Thank you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
[Yeah 3:32:48]. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Thank you, Mayor, for flagging that. And we'll acknowledge that 
that does keep me up a little bit at night as we go to 
implementation of the Housing Element when I consider all of 
the Council priorities that we have for Long-Range Planning 
Group, which is currently fully staffed and having to make 
choices about which items that we advance. Right now Renter 
Protections is receiving our focus but I think there’s more that we 
– [there 3:33:18] would like to be more movement on that. And 
we share that interest. So I will – we have an upcoming budget 
cycle and I'll be in coordination and talking with the City 
Manager’s office and our staff to understand what our staffing 
needs as we look to the future toward implementation of these 
programs. And whether it's a combination of consultant dollars 
or needing to bring folks onboard, we'll certainly want to 
consider that in context to some of the hiring challenges that I 
think the Council’s more than familiar with and see what's the 
best option. So thank you for... 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 68 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...[inaudible] [that 3:33:54]. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Well as long as we're on budgetary matters, as they relate to this 
topic, on C14, Page 14 and 15, we have the local trends in fair 
housing enforcement and outreach. And in the opening 
paragraph on top of Page C14, we talk about that Palo Alto’s 
served by the Legal Aid Society of Santa Clara [County 3:34:34]. 
The City is providing references 37,000 plus in FY21 of CDBG 
dollars to Project Sentinel to resolve Fair Housing complaints via 
investigation, mediation, education and outreach. So that 37,000 
that I see elsewhere, on the following page, it says the 
anticipated impact of these outreach efforts is 15 individuals. Is 
that the same number of individuals that – is that the number of 
individuals that are served by that funding? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. So Tim and I think these are numbers from the Annual 
Action Plan that we submit but we'll have to crosswalk that to 
see if that dollar is those 15 individuals. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. And either way, it goes to the question of if we're really 
going to be committed to this AFFH Program, do we have the 
resources to support the needs of these members of our 
community whether they are renters who are receiving improper 
or unjust or illegal actions by landlords or whether they're other 
people with disabilities or other needs? It just seems like we have 
far too few dollars to actually live up to our – the commitments 
that we're making here. And so without seeking an explicit 
answer to that, I'd like to put that on the table that in our 
budgetary process we need to reexamine our funding there. In 
the grand scheme of the budget, this is a pretty small dollar 
amount. In terms of providing the services that are needed to 
protect renters and low-income residents, it's an important 
allocation. And I've certainly heard anecdotally that the current 
resources just aren't adequate. And so if we're going to put this 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 69 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
in writing and talk the talk, we need to have the resources to 
walk the walk. Okay. And then I also have become more aware 
recently of – and it's referenced in this report. Let's see. I forget 
which page but non-income eligible disabled residents and when 
they run up against housing issues that are violating state and 
federal law, I should say, on accommodating disabilities, how do 
we really assure that we are able to adequately address those 
needs? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So we do not have a local multi-family or housing sort of code 
enforcement program to investigate those initiatives. When it 
comes to ADA compliance, there is a federal office – and I don’t 
have the contact information but perhaps we can communicate it 
through our channels – where individuals who are aggrieved by 
housing accommodations that don’t take into consideration their 
disability needs, there is a process by which the federal 
government can pursue investigation into those cases. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yeah. That’s a pretty involved process for someone to seek 
redress. And I know that we've discussed recent issues at [Casa 
Reale 3:39:18] that has had multiple occurrences of elevators 
going out and disabled people having real serious problems as a 
result. And so I just as part of this program, I'd like to – us look at 
how we can strengthen obligations of landlords to comply with 
City regulations as they apply to disabilities. And so I'll just put 
that out there as a future consideration. And then just a couple 
of comments. Vice Mayor Kou had referenced really a number of 
these studies that have really disagreed fundamentally with the 
basic premiss of the RHNA allocations. And initially it was this 
McKinsey study that asserted 3½ million shortage of housing 
units in California that the governor had repeated and many 
housing advocates had taken as gospel for a number of years and 
said that that needed to be the basis for the housing supply. It 
didn’t make any sense. If you look at the number of housing units 
in the state, it meant we were something like close to 20 percent 
fewer housing units than the current demand was there for. So in 
any event, we've now seen a number of very credible studies, 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 70 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
including Freddie Mac and most recently a study by the leading – 
a leading national housing and affordable housing advocacy 
group, Up For Growth, that said that the nationwide shortage 
was 3.8 million and California’s was 978,000.  
 
 
And the reason why that matters so much is that the RHNA 
numbers – my understanding is HCD is actually now using a 2.5 
million shortage. But it's a little opaque on how they're coming 
up with their statewide shortage numbers that then get assigned 
to regions and the regions then assign them to cities. But we're 
talking about numbers that very credible resources that are 
housing advocates are asserting are perhaps 2.5 times higher 
than the reality. And I appreciate that that is not something 
that’s within our purview to change. But I want to really say that 
we have housing problems and in terms of low- and moderate-
income housing. We have housing crises in our state, our region 
and even – and in our City. But the state allocating a artificial and 
incorrect goal doesn’t help matters except if the objective is to 
remove local decision-making and local democracy from 
addressing those problems. It's the only way to me that it really 
makes sense as to why they would be embracing numbers that 
are being refuted by highly reliable sources. So having said that, 
I'll move on. Two last points that brought up before is that under 
these RHNA allocations, all cities are assigned housing units and 
all housing sizes are treated equally. So studios are a housing 
unit.  
 
 
Three 3-bedroom townhomes are a housing unit. Cities are 
thereby – they're struggling to meet their housing mandates and 
so their incentivized to approve small multiple housing units, 
studios and 1 bedrooms, over families, 3 bedrooms, 2- and 3-
bedroom units. And the market in many cases is favoring those 
same small units. And at the same time, the state has recognized 
what we're experiencing locally is a rapid decline in school-aged 
populations and the state is saying we have a crisis; how do we 
deal with it? And my answer would be look in the mirror because 
the way that this – the allocations are set up are incentivizing 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 71 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
anti-family housing. And what we should instead be doing is 
some formula that is bedroom-based and have some balance of 
types of housing units that are being mandated. And right now 
we're all being incentivized to build massive numbers of studio 
apartments. And I think that's destructive to the social and the 
economic diversity that we all value. And then similarly, we have 
under the way in which we define or in the way in which the 
state defines different affordable housing categories based upon 
the county mean incomes. It looks at the size of the household 
and then it looks at the number of bedrooms. And so just like we 
saw on – what's the locale? What's it called? 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Alta.  
 
Pat Burt: 
AltaLocale, they came forward with a whole bunch of very small 
studios. And they were able to say that the price that they would 
be assigning or asking on their moderate-income units fell into 
that 120 AMI category. And then lo and behold, they were $50 
less than the market rate units except now they’ve dropped the 
price on the market rate units, so I'm not even sure that they're 
actually less than the market rate units. And the reason that is is 
because if they were larger units, instead of $3,500, they'd be 
charging $4,500 and they wouldn't qualify as 120 percent AMI. 
But because they shrink the size, they qualify under an AMI 
category. So what we have is a system that incentives shrinking 
the size of units in order to qualify under different income 
categories and that’s a real problem going forward.  
 
 
So I just wanna put that on the table. It's not something any of us 
can resolve but when we're talking about our broader housing 
issues and how we reconcile meeting the state mandates with 
trying to have balances of housing types, to have our affordable 
units actually be livable units and not microunits just because 
people are lower income, the ways in which the state has set up 
these rules are working against these values. And how we end up 
correcting that is – remains to be seen but I wanted to put that 
out there as part of our broader housing discussion. And I'm not 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 72 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
seeing any other lights, so maybe we're getting ready to move 
forward to motions. Vice Mayor Kou? 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Actually I don’t have a motion but I just wanted to add that with 
these bills, with these widely inflated RHNA mandates, which 
require cities to change the zoning to allow bigger and taller 
projects on the lots, this is all up-zoning. And so by creating a 
bigger development envelope, up-zoning allows more 
apartments to be built, raising the economic value of the up-
zoned lot. Up-zoning also creates windfall increases in property 
values, especially for undeveloped commercial and multi-family 
residential lots making the cost of housing more expensive and it 
certainly does not trickle down. So with all of this building, if this 
government or HCD or these legislators thinking that all of this 
up-zoning is gonna create more affordable housing, it is not. And 
with our – with the way – there’s also the job multiplier where 
employers and workers come into a city. They bring in a number 
of people who help out, who work here in the City in order to 
serve that group of people, specifically in the past, a lot of the 
tech workers. And so for these people to have to drive so far to 
get over here, this government is not doing the right – the state 
legislation is not doing the right thing in order to ensure that 
people can live close to their communities where they work. So 
again, it is just a set up to fail.  
 
 
The other thing I wanted to also say is that with SB 828, what it 
also allows for is that – actually it's SB 35, it also allows the 
developers, once they're entitled to get the property, they allow 
to developers – I mean it doesn’t give the City the number of 
units that we have actually entitled or approved the application 
for. Developers – it doesn’t – the developers will have to [pull 
3:49:43] the building permit in order to allow for those numbers 
and often times the developers don’t do it. I mean we have a 
example here where when I first joined Council, I think that 
building used to be Mike’s Bikes over on El Camino on the 
[inaudible] [part 3:50:02] of Palo Alto past Page Mill, we entitled 
them, approved their permit and they never built the housing. I 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 73 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
know that there’s other housing going in right now but it's been 
many years and that could be accounted towards our RHNA 
numbers back then. So there is definitely a lot of holes that does 
not help the City and I think that that’s something that should 
also be included, that perhaps they should look at changing that 
because at the end of the day, City doesn’t build these units. We 
approve the permits or the entitlements to it. So I'm done. Thank 
you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Council Member Filseth? 
 
Eric Filseth: 
Yeah. Thanks. So I'm not gonna add too much here. I think where 
we are tonight, I think, first of all, most of the heavy lifting on this 
is done. I think we're working through the latter stages of the 
process here. So I think there’s things in here we all like. There’s 
things in here that boy, we wish this could be different but at this 
point, I think we're working toward a rather draconian deadline. I 
think basically we're in a position that theoretically if HCD 
doesn’t – decides they don’t wanna approve our application on 
the first round, we might have – I think Santa Monica’s got what, 
20 builder’s remedy applications goin’ on right now or something 
like that? And that could be us on February 1. So I think we need 
to move forward. I think this is good enough to get us where we 
need to go, although I think staff’s direction on flushing out a few 
last areas, I think is useful and I think we should proceed with 
that. And then as somebody pointed out earlier, this is going to 
continue to evolve. And as we map stuff to it, it's gonna give us a 
direction.  
 
 
But it doesn’t necessarily constrain every single project that 
happens over the next 8 years. I did wanna ask a question 
somebody brought up about the issue of affordable housing on 
City parking lots, which is City land. So my inclination – I recall 
when we discussed this, we said this is public land; we have a 
duty to be good stewards of public land. And we said well, okay, 
affordable housing is arguably a public good but other kinds of 
land uses maybe not so much. And so as somebody else pointed 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 74 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
out, I think we're gonna hit the market rate target on this. I 
actually think we've got a very good chance of doing that. I didn’t 
think so before the Housing Element process started but I think 
our chances of hitting the market rate target are pretty good. I 
think we're gonna really struggle with the affordable housing, [so 
3:53:05] below market without sort of lots and lots and lots of 
money, as other people have pointed out, which doesn’t seem to 
be coming forth coming from the state. So my inclination is that 
if we are gonna give up public land or commit public land to 
specific uses ‘cause then it's sort of not changeable for the next 
century, we oughta reserve that for 100 percent affordable 
housing.  
 
 
I think – I'm not sure we need to for market rate housing and, 
furthermore, if you look at all the state mandates, down in the 
fine print, it says well, you can have – they gotta be at least two-
thirds housing but you can have a third commercial too. And I 
certainly don’t wanna give up public land for office space, for 
example. So I guess my question to staff is that the language in 
1.4 isn't specific to 100 percent affordable housing and the 
question is should it be? On the one hand, if we put that, is HCD 
gonna look at this and say oh, that’s another constrain or 
something like that? And obviously we can't constrain future 
councils. I mean the next council could come along and say we 
really think it makes sense to put an office building on the 
parking lot – a public parking lot. But maybe we should sorta be 
trying to communicate our intent, if that makes sense. So what's 
– a very long-winded question of what’s staff’s reaction to the 
idea of adding 100 percent to the line about – in 1.4 about – and 
that’s on Page... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. I think it's 512 – 510. 
 
Eric Filseth: 
Page 510.  
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So... 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 75 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Eric Filseth: 
[Inaudible 3:54:38]. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...I think Hamilton Hutchings had spoken to this and this is an 
area where the Housing Element Working Group spent a lot of 
time and I... 
 
Eric Filseth: 
Yeah. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...their intent was that it be 100 percent affordable as you're 
articulating it now. 
 
Eric Filseth: 
That’s my recollection too. Yeah. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
The reason it's drafted this way is just to provide flexibility. 
Knowing that if the City’s providing the land, that is good and 
that takes a lot of the pressure – a big constraint to a housing 
provider if we have a favorable lease term on the long-term use 
of that property. And so it's a policy question for the Council. The 
reason it's in there is just in case we needed to add a little bit 
more incentive to a for-profit housing developer to build there. 
 
Eric Filseth: 
[Yeah 3:55:36]. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
A low-income – a nonprofit homebuilder probably wouldn't do 
market rate because they probably wouldn't be eligible for the 
low-income tax credits, which... 
 
Eric Filseth: 
Right. I mean my... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...would require... 
 
Eric Filseth: 
I think all of our intent was this would be – we'd be talking about 
another project like Wilton Court or 525 Charleston... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. 
 
Eric Filseth: 
...or 231 Grant or something like that, right? 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 76 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So... 
 
Eric Filseth: 
Well... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...I guess the answer is if that’s the Council’s interest, then that – 
you can send us that direction. Just before we move off that, I 
just wanna give our consultant a change to weigh in if there was 
more beyond a policy... 
 
Eric Filseth: 
[Right 3:56:13]. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...consideration... 
 
Eric Filseth: 
[Yeah 3:56:13]. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...if there was something from HCD. 
 
Eric Filseth: 
That would be helpful.  
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Brenna, any insight on that? 
 
Brenna Weatherby: 
Yeah. I don’t think so. I mean I agree with what you said 
earlier. We crafted this to allow for some flexibility but that it 
was the Working Group’s intention, as we've stated. So yeah, I 
don’t have anything else, I think, to add on top of what you 
already said.  
 
Eric Filseth: 
So I'd be inclined to support the Working Group’s [inaudible 
3:56:42] the Working Group’s attention here. And again this 
doesn’t constrain a future Council from doing something 
different. We can't do that. And they could come back and say 
no, we wanna go a different direction. But it's just that after 7.99 
years of doing this and having seen a bunch a projects, it just 
seems like we get into these discussions with sorta parties on the 
opposite side and we say okay, this piece is ours and this piece is 
yours and then it just seems like they always come back and say 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 77 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
well, how about a little more a yours for us. And then we 
deliberate and we agonize and we say well, how about we split 
the difference. And they say okay and then they come back later 
and they say well, how about just a little bit more [and so forth 
3:57:28]. And I think maybe we're better off being clear about 
this. So I would support adding the word 100 percent in between 
requires and affordable on Item A on Page 510. And I don’t know 
if you need a motion for that or not. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yes, we would. 
 
Eric Filseth: 
I move that we add the word 100 percent in between [the line 
3:57:56]... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Why don’t we... 
 
Eric Filseth: 
...the line [inaudible 3:57:57]... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Why don’t we wait and when we get a motion, we'll... 
 
Eric Filseth: 
Fair enough. Fair enough.  
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 3:58:01]. 
 
Eric Filseth: 
Okay. Thanks. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. Council Member DuBois? 
 
Tom DuBois: 
I was gonna make a motion if Council Member Filseth wasn’t. But 
– so I would move – make the staff motion with the amendment 
that we just talked about to Program 1.4. 
 
Pat Burt: 
And I will second that.  
 
Tom DuBois: 
Okay. And [inaudible 3:58:52] get the language for the 
amendment or we could just say that Program 1.4 is for 100 
percent Affordable Housing projects.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 78 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. Did you wanna speak to your motion? 
 
Tom DuBois: 
No. I mean – well just a minute I guess. Like I said in the first 2 
rounds, again I think this really represents a lotta work by a lotta 
people. I think it's a pretty good Housing Element. I think our last 
couple Housing Elements won awards. I hope we win an award 
for this one. And hopefully we get it passed early next year. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Thank you. And so I would – speaking to the motion, I'd like to 
offer 2 amendments. The first is to – and, Director Lait, you can 
help me on how to frame this but it's to direct staff to bring 
forward zoning changes that would remove the Conditional Use 
Permit for housing in the Stanford Research Park where housing 
is a compatible use. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. And I think, Mayor, we would wanna put that under 
Program 1.5 and add an implementation objective, maybe letter 
F, to do what you just said, which is to allow – to remove the CUP 
requirement for housing in the Research Park where appropriate 
and what I mean by that is not adjacent to hazardous areas or 
where we conflict with our local ordinance on that already. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Good. Is that one acceptable to the maker? 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Yes. 
 
Pat Burt: 
And then secondly and I again am looking for assistance from the 
staff on how to frame this but to capture the issue I raised earlier 
about pursuing affordable housing preferences for historically 
disadvantaged populations. And I'll take any advice on how to 
word that. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Can I ask a question while – so I mean staff said that they are 
going to work on some additional objectives. I guess we really 
haven't heard what they were – had in mind, right? 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 79 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Jonathan Lait: 
So I can speak to that. So Attachment A shows the 4 programs 
that we highlighted in the presentation and it speaks generally to 
the other types of what we'll call non-substantive changes that 
we would anticipate making. But we're asking the Council to give 
us some discretion or leeway to make changes to the document 
that you're reviewing tonight in response to additional public 
comments that may come in and in our sort of last-ditch effort to 
review the comments from other jurisdictions to minimize to the 
extent feasible the number of comments that we're gonna get 
from HCD and... 
 
Tom DuBois: 
[Okay 4:02:43]. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...so that’s how we would approach that. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
But specifically to AFFH, which the mayor’s composing an 
amendment here, what kind of – [that 4:02:56] separate from 
the programs you already mentioned, you said you would 
implement additional objectives for... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. [No. So 4:03:03]... 
 
Tom DuBois: 
...AFFH. So does this fall in line with that or did you have other 
things in mind? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So I don’t have a precise response to your question because 
we're still vetting that out. The – but I will say this proposed 
implementation objective that the mayor has articulated, that’s a 
policy change that is what we would call substantive. You 
wouldn’t want us to make that unilaterally on our own. So if you 
want that specific provision, we would encourage that to be 
included in the motion because our edits are gonna be more to 
comply with HCD’s expectations of how does of a AFFH chapter 
in a housing element comport with state law. This goes beyond 
what is required of us for the Housing Element. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
[Inaudible 4:02:02]... 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 80 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Pat Burt: 
Can I add that we have – we and really society more broadly have 
struggled with not only how we move forward as a society and in 
our housing as a major part of that in ways that are inclusive and 
truly nondiscriminatory but it's a much greater challenge on how 
we act to redress past discriminations. And I think this is one of 
the ways that we could do so that would be meaningful and I 
think it would be a real step in the right direction for us to do this 
to the extent permissible by law.  
 
Ed Shikada: 
Well I think – and Molly can certainly speak to any legal 
permissibility questions. From an implementation perspective, I 
think that quite frankly this leaves a lot of room for 
interpretation [and 4:05:18]... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Well and I will say it's not intended to be narrowly prescriptive 
and that this would need to be flushed out. 
 
Ed Shikada: 
Understanding [then 4:05:28], I will invoke the phrase the devil is 
in the details because I suspect it really is in this case. And so this 
could be a small undertaking or a humungous undertaking. And 
it's within that range of interpretation that I think staff needs 
some clarity as to what you have in mind and ultimately that the 
Council has in mind for what this would be in order to allow us to 
do this in a manner that keeps it from being somewhat [inaudible 
4:06:10]. 
 
Pat Burt: 
[Inaudible 4:06:10]. So my assumption is that this would need to 
come back for a deeper discussion and that this would be a policy 
direction. There’s no way that we're going to be able to answer 
those questions that you have tonight. 
 
Ed Shikada: 
Yeah. 
 
Pat Burt: 
And... 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Can we... 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 81 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yeah. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Can we word this in a way, again, that would let us complete the 
Housing Element? I don’t know if there’s a way we can word this 
which is a little bit more flexible. I mean I kinda had that same 
concern that Ed just mentioned, [which is 4:06:42] it could mean 
a really wide range of things and it's – I don’t think we wanna 
hold up the whole Housing Element to go deep on this right now. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Nope. And that’s part of why I was asking staff for any 
recommendations on the wording. At the same time, I don’t 
wanna lose the opportunity to begin to move forward on this and 
at least set it as a policy direction while we then have to work 
through what would be programatic elements to it. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Yeah. So again [the 4:07:16] typical ask staff to explore 
Affordable Housing preferences [and then 4:07:23]... 
 
Pat Burt: 
So does that language – I'm not seeing much from staff in terms 
of recommended language but... 
 
Ed Shikada: 
Well... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yeah. 
 
Ed Shikada: 
...if I might, Mayor... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yeah. 
 
Ed Shikada: 
...just a little sidebar here that – and again this [bit 4:07:43] of a 
spontaneous reaction. Typically an order to address an issue that 
has been phrased as has been would require some form of 
disparity study that would identify and quantify differential – this 
– and define basically what is historically disadvantaged mean 
and how would that then be measured not only in terms of what 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 82 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
the disadvantage was but then what is the level of compe-, or 
method of compensating for that. 
 
Pat Burt: 
And including in that is what – how we differentiate where those 
past practices are having remnants today and where they may 
not. These are complicated issues. So the intention here is to 
begin this process developing what a program like this might look 
like, to research what other cities and jurisdictions have done 
amongst those few that perhaps have done this and begin this 
process. So that’s the intention. And I'm open to staff 
recommendations on language that recognizing... 
 
Male: 
Yeah. 
 
Pat Burt: 
...that it is not the intention tonight to attempt to pre-... 
 
Male: 
Yeah. 
 
Pat Burt: 
...-scribe or determine the answers to set of questions that will 
be relevant here but... 
 
Male: 
[Okay 4:09:18]. 
 
Pat Burt: 
...to move forward in terms of saying this is a program that we 
wish to develop and it won't be simple. 
 
Ed Shikada: 
So lemme me ask Mr. Lait to perhaps make a suggestion here 
with the context for our little huddle here being a suggestion of 
perhaps articulate the next step as opposed to necessarily the 
outline of a program itself. So go ahead, Jon. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yes. If we did a program – if we – I think it's important to 
distinguish a program, the effort itself, which is a year’s long 
effort from the – what I heard you explain a moment ago, which 
is research, find out what other people have done to address this 
issue, come back, share what you’ve learned and begin to sketch 
out some options on how we might go forward. If we did that, 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 83 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
that is a more discrete action that presumably we would get 
Council direction on with understanding the scope and time and 
effort thereof. If we do it as I just described, we can put that in as 
a implementing objective as opposed to a brand new program. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
And maybe we put it under Program 6.6, Fair Housing. Maybe 
we'll figure out where best to slide that in. The other thing I 
wanted to just flag is on the timeline because this is not a 
requirement for RHNA compliance. It's not a requirement for 
Housing Element. The timeline will follow after we get all those 
mandated code changes that we need to change. So we'll need 
to slot it in at an appropriate time in our... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Well and... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...schedule. 
 
Pat Burt: 
...I would suggest that there could be some overlap where we 
begin to have initial discussions without being able to move 
forward on a flushed out program. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Okay.  
 
Pat Burt: 
But we don’t necessarily wait sequentially for all those other 
things to be implemented before we start putting some meat on 
the bone on this. And maybe this is a referral that we – what's 
the role of HRC in this? What the role of the Planning and 
Transportation Commission? So whenever we would have a first 
substantive discussion at the Council on this, that’s when we can 
figure out kind of a little more guidance with an understanding 
that this will take time. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Okay. So, Clerk, if we could add language to see – that says add 
an implementation objective to Program 6 – we'll just leave it at 
6 for now – and to study and research what other jurisdictions 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 84 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
have done to provide affordable housing preferences for 
historically disadvantaged populations. 
 
Pat Burt: 
And would that be instead of this initial... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yes. 
 
Pat Burt: 
...[clause 4:12:59]? Great. Okay.  
 
Jonathan Lait: 
And report back to the City Council... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...at the end. And then we'll fine tune the language as we get that 
ready for publication. But again, if we're – I just wanna check in 
with our consultant to – Brenna, if your – if you have any input 
on this letter C on the screen. 
 
Brenna Weatherby: 
Not right now but we should just talk a little bit more to 
Veronica as she’s – Veronica Tam is assisting us with the program 
development. So we should talk to her a little bit more, Jonathan. 
She’ll know if – what else is – maybe something similar has been 
done elsewhere that she'll have better language for. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Great. And so for the Council, this is to guide us and we will work 
on getting some more language that tightens it up a little bit.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. Thank you.  
 
Tom DuBois: 
Great. So I think with those changes, I'll go ahead and accept 
that. 
 
Male: 
Okay. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. Vice Mayor Kou? 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 85 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Lydia Kou: 
On A, adding in the word hundred percent, is good. But as you 
know, affordable is also defined by the City up to 120 percent 
and now the state has actually gone to 150 percent AMI. So is the 
intent to leave it open so that should a project come in looking at 
doing 150 percent AMI, 100 affordable, is – that’s almost market 
rate. So well that is market rate and is that the intent to leave it 
at that without prescribing a range... 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:14:52]. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...of... 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:15:54]. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...truly affordable to such and such AMI? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So our local ordinance defines what affordable housing is and it's 
at 120 percent area median income and the City’s going to be 
involved in the process of if we get interest from a nonprofit 
home builder, we may want to articulate the number of 
bedrooms. And I think when you get to these – the bedroom 
sizes of the units and I think as your units get larger, the 120 
percent AMI number is more consequential to the tenant than it 
may be if it's a studio for the reasons that have been articulated 
this evening. So the City’s gonna have a role in the unit and mix – 
bedroom mix of any development that would come forward. So I 
guess again I think if you wanted to just provide the most 
flexibility from an affordable housing standpoint, you could say 
120 percent. I do think that most nonprofit home builders are 
probably gonna come in under that because just for the tax – the 
financing to support the construction of the project. But you may 
get a market rate builder who could build at 120 percent AMI. 
That might be possible, so... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Yeah. I mean that’s where my concern is, that anytime somebody 
comes in, a developer says oh, we need the higher AMI because 
we're not gonna pencil out or it doesn’t work out for us. I think 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 86 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
on this one here, we, the City and the Council needs to kinda 
really hone in on this public property, that it does benefit those 
that are most in need and that we're able to hit those numbers 
for the low and the low-low folks. So I would just feel much more 
comfortable if it's designated for a certain – like 80 percent and 
below or even 100 percent and below but definitely not leaving it 
open for above 100 percent... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
[So 4:17:17]... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...and above. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. So I don’t think A – the small A – again we got a lotta A’s 
tonight – the second A on this screen, it's capped, as I read it, at 
100 percent affordable housing up to 100 percent. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
I thought the hundred percent... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Oh, I see. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...was the entire... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
No. I'm reading... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...project... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
...that wrong. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...being 100. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Yeah. You're right. So that would include 120 percent AMI. And 
what you're saying is you’d like to see it capped at 80 percent 
AMI? 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Eighty percent or below.  
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Okay. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 87 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Yeah. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So that’s a... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
So I wanna... 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
We can do whatever the Council wants to see on that. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Would the maker and the seconder comment and accept? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
And as you're doing that, I'll just note, I think we have this – it 
was mentioned tonight, there’s an active RFI out for – to solicit 
feedback from people on development on this. So just there may 
be a shift in that effort as well if this change goes forward. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
You were... 
 
Ed Shikada: 
Right. And... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...kinda muffled. 
 
Ed Shikada: 
...I would just note that given that process underway and if – 
essentially how we're now defining the type of proposals we're 
seeking, we will not attract market rate developers. This will be 
purely affordable developers that will express interest in working 
on these projects. And I would I think be willing to venture that 
the discussion of affordability will be something that the Council, 
the City and the Council specifically will be able to define as you 
get further down the road.  
 
Tom DuBois: 
So how was the RFI put out? What was requested? 
 
Ed Shikada: 
We actually do not have the specific status of that at this 
moment. So I cannot report to you on that. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
[But there 4:19:20] was no affordability mention? 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 88 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
So again we don’t – I may have misspoke earlier. We don’t 
actually know if the RFI has gone out. If – I know that we’ve been 
working on revisions of that. I don’t believe it had stipulated a – I 
think it had the opportunity somebody to propose a mixed 
affordable and market rate option. But if this motion goes 
forward, we will obviously need to pivot on that and update it so 
that it's really geared toward affordable housing nonprofit 
homebuilders, which is fine. We can do that if that’s the Council’s 
interest. And again I just think, again Council’s call. We define 
affordable housing as 120 percent AMI so – and just to echo 
what City Manager said, this City Coun-, the City Council is going 
to have the option to accept a proposal, to approve the proposal. 
So you’ve got many points in the process to set the direction and 
be able to approve the project. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Yeah. And I can appreciate that – when the project come forward 
that we can decide whether to move forward or not. At the same 
time, with this very clearly that we're seeking deep affordability, 
80 percent and below, that the folks that are gonna respond to 
the RFI are not gonna expect that they can do more. They are 
gonna get 120 or more. So I would feel a lot more comfortable if 
we’re really concise with our messaging and with our direction. 
So I would feel much more comfortable with that. And I'd love 
for comments from the maker and the seconder.  
 
Tom DuBois: 
One more question for Jon. Would it be different to say 100 
percent BMR housing versus 80 percent? 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
That would allow up to 120 percent AMI. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Still? 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Oh, I thought below market rate was below 100. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Below market rate is our overall program that implements the 
affordability restrictions up to and including 120 percent AMI.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 89 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Okay. I thought we were using affordable 120 but below market 
rate was below AMI. Maybe I misunderstood. I mean I – again I 
feel like land cost is such a big part of below market rate housing, 
I would be open to the 80 percent. So I would accept the change. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Will the seconder? Thank you.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Yes, I'll accept that. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Thank you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. I see no further comments. Oh, Council Member Tanaka? 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
Yeah. So first of all, I just wanna thank everyone for your guys’ 
work on this. I know I looked at this myself several times both on 
Council and on the Planning Commission, so it's a ton a work. 
Appreciate everyone’s input on this. I agree that we wanna make 
sure that we retain our zoning rights and so I think getting 
something out is important, so I agree on that. I think overall 
what staff did here largely right. I can't agree with big letter A. I 
can agree with B. I think the main issue I have is that – and I said 
this before. But I think the idea of 100 percent affordable housing 
is very noble. I think it's something which is kinda like cherry pie 
and all that good stuff in life but the reality is we have to ask 
ourselves who built this housing and how does it get built and 
how does it get funded. And my main challenge with affordable 
housing, while it sounds really good, the main challenge I have 
with it is that you're expecting developers to lose money to build 
something and I just don’t think that’s realistic.  
 
 
[Somebody’ll 4:23:54] say well, look, well we'll just get the state 
to fund it. The state, I think, this coming year is actually projected 
to have a $25 billion or $30 billion deficit. I don’t know if you 
guys know but 3,000 people in California paid something like 75 
percent of the state revenue and those people are starting to 
move out. So I think this is something where if we really do want 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 90 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
it to solve the housing crisis, I think that mandating – I think staff 
is right. I think what staff said earlier was correct. I think we 
wanna have that flexibility so that maybe something that’s closer 
to this but not exactly can be built because this is what puts 
money into our affordable housing fund, that this is what actually 
allows things to be built and more BMR units to be created. So 
while I think this is a very noble idea, I just think it's practically 
not possible and so I wanna ask that we split the motion between 
big A and B. Thank you. 
 
Pat Burt: 
You want just B under A split out? I'll briefly speak to that. I'm 
surprised that there’s a question as to how this would be built. 
This would be by nonprofit affordable housing developers in all 
likelihood, like the vast majority of our affordable housing. The 
difference is that in this case they hopefully will have a significant 
land discount and there’s still a parking issue and replacing the 
existing parking. But we have the Charities Housing Project for 
120-plus units that is coming forward where they had to 
purchase that land, similarly on Wilton Court site and most of our 
affordable housing projects where they have to outright 
purchase the land, which is a huge hurdle. But in general, once 
they have the land, they can bring together the various funding 
sources from regional, state, federal and philanthropic resources 
to build these projects. So that's my answer to Council Member 
Tanaka’s question.  
 
Ed Shikada: 
Mr... 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:24:24]. 
 
Ed Shikada: 
...Mayor? 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yeah.  
 
Ed Shikada: 
At the appropriate time I would like to make a comment as well. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Sorry? 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 91 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Ed Shikada: 
At the appropriate time I wanted to make an additional 
comment. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. But let's see. We're – that’s A-B we wanna break out, small 
letter B under A is a – to be voted on separately. And go ahead, 
Mr. Shikada. 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
[Well actually] [inaudible 4:27:59]... 
 
Ed Shikada: 
Two... 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
...clerk did it right the first time. 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:27:03]. 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:27:03]. 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
Yeah. Yes.  
 
Ed Shikada: 
Thank you, Mayor, members of the Council. Two things: One, did 
confirm that RFI is not out, so we do not need to revise anything. 
We will simply take whatever direction the Council or 
specification that the Council approves and bake it into that 
request for letters of interest. The second point may be a little 
more difficult because this is a bit of a stretch but I did want to 
call to the Council’s attention the question of Workforce Housing. 
We haven't really had a specific discussion but there certainly has 
– have been a number of inquiries there. If the concept for this 
use of the City-owned lots were to include an interest in 
Workforce Housing, specifically City Workforce Housing, I am 
again stretching here but I believe the 80 percent AMI may 
exclude a large portion of our workforce. So if that were – again 
City workforce were a part of the goal here, I want to bring it to 
your attention that it is likely that that threshold would exclude 
much of the City workforce.  
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 92 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Pat Burt: 
All right. So let's when we go back to the main motion, let's see if 
we want to consider implications of that. So just on – we're now 
just speaking to this – what we've broken off as B there. Is that 
right? Let's see. We were trying to separate small letter B. 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
[Inaudible 4:29:11]. 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:29:11]. 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
All I'm tryin’ to do is just basically I personally like the staff’s 
original recommendation... 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:29:19]. 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
...[if it's the 4:29:19] correct one. And so B is an altered one and 
so that’s why I say split it. So I'm not asking that we make an 
amendment here or we have a separate motion. It’s just literally 
to split the motion. That's it. 
 
Pat Burt: 
I'm sorry. And maybe I misspoke. So which one did you wanna 
peel off? 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
The one that the clerk has done right now.  
 
Pat Burt: 
[Inaudible 4:29:38] direct staff. Sorry? 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
This – the clerk’s already done it, splitting A and B. That’s it.  
 
Female: 
[Inaudible 4:29:48]. 
 
Pat Burt: 
You wanted all of A split off, you're saying? 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
Just splitting... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Large letter A? 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
Just splitting large letter A and B. That’s it. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 93 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Pat Burt: 
You want to vote on large letter A separately? 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
That’s right.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. So then in that case, then we – I thought you were just 
talking about small letter B. In that case, we can then under the 
City Manager’s – the issue that the City Manager raised, I guess 
I'd like to suggest we consider adding language [inaudible 
4:30:42] after the comma or for City Workforce Housing for City 
employees. Does that open it up well enough? And... 
 
Ed Shikada: 
Again acknowledging that we don’t have the math behind that 
right now but I think it certainly captures that goal should that be 
the Council’s interest. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. So does the maker of the motion accept that? And I don’t 
know the sequence because it was Vice Mayor Kou who really 
asked for the – this change and so [I'm gonna 4:31:27] ask 
consent from both of them. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Yes. Council Member Kou, is this... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Yes. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
So generally I would say I think public land should be used for 
affordable housing, not generally workforce but I guess I would 
accept this for City employees. 
 
Male: 
Okay. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. All right. Council Member Filseth? 
 
Eric Filseth: 
Well I just wanted to speak briefly to the big A-small A split here. 
I think there’s actually 2 really distinctly different world views 
here and which one you have sort of gives guidance to which way 
you're gonna vote on this. In one world view, basically regulation 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 94 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
is the problem and if we deregulate everything, then the private 
sector will produce a good society for us. The other view is that 
actually society needs to be paid for and it's really government 
that needs to decide our job – who pays for society? Because we 
can't really lay that on the private sector. I mean their job is to – 
returns to their shareholders. It's really [not 4:32:36] our job. And 
then so depending on which of those 2 world views you have sort 
of gives guidance on how you're gonna vote on Item A here. 
Thanks. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Council Member Stone? 
 
Greer Stone: 
Thank you, Mr. Mayor. I'm willing to accept A, little A, the 
Workforce Housing inclusion if we also include teachers in that 
because they're not technically City employees but they also 
serve our community and would meet that same issue of not 
being qualified for 80 percent AMI, probably make more than 
that but don’t traditionally qualify for other affordable housing. 
[Inaudible 4:33:17] the maker and the seconder would be willing 
to include teachers into that or for Workforce Housing for City 
employees and teachers. 
 
Pat Burt: 
I would be willing to accept that. Council Member DuBois? 
 
Eric Filseth: 
Do you want teachers or PAUSD employees? 
 
Greer Stone: 
I don’t know if we want to be as prescriptive as that at the 
moment. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
I'd prefer again... 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:33:50]. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
I... 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:33:51]. 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 95 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Tom DuBois: 
...don’t think – I don’t really want to accept that one. I think again 
we should be using public land for below market rate housing. 
But again because this is a City lot, I think the City employees 
made sense. 
 
Greer Stone: 
I offer it as an unfriendly then. 
 
Pat Burt: 
I will second that.  
 
Male: 
Great. Thank you.  
 
Greer Stone: 
[Inaudible 4:34:24] I think the logic is the same here. If we're 
trying to encourage City employees being able to live in the same 
community that they serve, I think we should extend that to 
teachers. And we continue to see an exodus of good teachers out 
of the region because they can't afford housing. My wife and I 
struggle with this all the time. We've heard public commenters 
today and we've heard them in the past on the importance for 
this. This seems like the golden opportunity to be able to provide 
some of that housing. I don’t see how this isn't logically 
connected to same thing for Workforce Housing for City 
employees. 
 
Pat Burt: 
And I would just add that what we have here is that a focused on 
low-income Affordable Housing and then including low-income 
and missing-middle Workforce Housing for City employees and 
teachers. And we're not talking about really high income people 
in either of those cases. So I think it's – it addresses both the 
focus on true low income and an additional focus on critical 
employees in the public sector. Okay. Lemme clear this. Does 
anybody wanna speak to the – yeah? 
 
Tom DuBois: 
[Inaudible 4:35:53] on this. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. Go ahead.  
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 96 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Tom DuBois: 
Yeah. So again I'm not a teacher by any means but PAUSD has 
been banking land for some time. They didn’t wanna participate 
in the [County 4:36:09] Teacher Housing Project, so – and again 
our City land is quite limited. So if PAUSD doesn’t want to 
support these programs, again I'm concerned about using our 
very limited City land for this specific purpose. And [they're 
4:36:29] making the teachers generally – there are a lot of 
private schools in the area. It just seems like we've gotten far 
away from using these limited – there’s 6 City parking lots. We 
need to get that very low affordable housing and I was willing to 
add City employees but I think we're going far afield of where... 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:36:51]. 
 
Tom DuBois: 
...I thought this program would be, so I can't support this. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Council Member Filseth? Okay. Vice Mayor Kou? 
 
Lydia Kou: 
If it's PAUSD teachers, would you consider adding that in? I 
think... 
 
Greer Stone: 
I'd be fine restricting it if we want to restrict it down to PAUSD 
and maybe open it up to just PAUSD employees. There are a lot 
of instructional assistants and others who work within the 
district, who could desperately use this housing and who 
frequently make less money than teachers. Even so, I'm fine with 
further restricting it to PAUSD personnel.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
That would help... 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:37:34]. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...a lot, especially with the substitute teachers and the aides and 
so forth. They're very valuable. So I appreciate you considering it. 
Thank you. 
 
Greer Stone: 
Yeah. As long as the seconder is fine with that.  
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 97 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. Yeah. I see no more lights, so let's vote on this revised A-A. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Council Member Tanaka? 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Council Member Stone? 
 
Greer Stone: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Council Mem-, or Vice Mayor Kou? 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Council Member Filseth? 
 
Eric Filseth: 
No. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Council Member DuBois? 
 
Tom DuBois: 
No. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Mayor Burt? 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
And I'm not seeing Council Member Cormack. Motion carries 4 to 
2.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. All right. So we'll now vote on Section A [with 4:39:03]... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Could I... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yes. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
May I ask... 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 98 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
 
Pat Burt: 
Vice Mayor Kou? 
 
Lydia Kou: 
I wanted to ask the maker and seconder if they would consider 
adding a D and to add to the Housing Element document the 
Auditor’s Regional Housing Needs Audit, the Freddie Mac’s 
Research and Perspective paper highlights titled The Housing 
Supply Shortage: State of the States, Department of Finance’s 
population for the period between July 1, 2020 and July 1, 2021, 
and Embarcadero Institute’s analysis double counting in the 
latest housing needs assessment? 
 
Pat Burt: 
So I would not accept it because I think those are valid political 
arguments that we should be making but are not appropriate for 
the Housing Element.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
Then if... 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:40:20]. 
 
Pat Burt: 
[And 4:40:20] – I'm sorry. Maker? Council Member DuBois? 
 
Tom DuBois: 
You stated it well. That’s the concern I have as well. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
If I might just take a chance and put it to a unfriendly 
amendment if I... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. If you have... 
 
Lydia Kou: 
 ...get a second... 
 
Pat Burt: 
...a second. 
 
Lydia Kou: 
...I get a... 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 99 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Pat Burt: 
Yeah.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
...second? If not, not.  
 
Pat Burt: 
I don’t see a second.  
 
Lydia Kou: 
Okay. Thank you.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. Now looks like we can vote on this motion. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Okay. And just noting for the Council I was not aware that 
Council Member Cormack was recused from this item, so I 
reflected... 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
...that on the previous vote as well. Okay. All right. Council 
Member DuBois? 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Council Member Filseth? 
 
Eric Filseth: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Mayor Burt? 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Council Member Tanaka? 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
We're voting on A, right? 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Just on A [inaudible 4:41:25]. 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
[Yeah 4:41:25]. 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 100 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Pat Burt: 
Large... 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
[No 4:41:26]. 
 
Pat Burt: 
...letter A. 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
Large letter A, no.  
 
Lesley Milton: 
Okay. Council Member Stone? 
 
Greer Stone: 
Yes.  
 
Lesley Milton: 
Vice Mayor Kou? 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Okay. Motion carries 4 to 2.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Okay. Great. And now well go to the main motion.  
 
Lesley Milton: 
I have the residual motion, not the main [motion 4:41:51]. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Residual? Okay. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Yes. [Yeah. That’s okay 4:41:53]. So just on Item B now? Okay. 
Council Member Tanaka? 
 
Greg Tanaka: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Council Member Stone? 
 
Greer Stone: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Vice Mayor Kou? 
 
Lydia Kou: 
Yes. 
 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 101 of 101 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes:  11/28/2022 
Lesley Milton: 
Council Member Filseth? 
 
Eric Filseth: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Council Member DuBois? 
 
Tom DuBois: 
Yes.  
 
Lesley Milton: 
And Mayor Burt? 
 
Pat Burt: 
Yes. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
Motion carries unanimously with recusal of... 
 
Pat Burt: 
All right. 
 
Lesley Milton: 
...Vice Mayor – or recusal of Council Member Cormack. 
 
Pat Burt: 
Well thanks to everyone involved. The work’s not done but it's a 
major milestone and thank you to the public who participated 
and to the members of the community who put in many months 
working on this. So it's a great accomplishment and thanks again 
for everybody’s work.  
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Thank you, Mayor. 
 
Male: 
[Inaudible 4:42:46]. 
 
Jonathan Lait: 
Thank you, City Council.  
 
Pat Burt: 
Yeah.  
 
COUNCIL MEMBER QUESTIONS, COMMENTS AND ANNOUNCEMENTS 
None. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 11:08 P.M. 
