CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 25 
 Special Meeting 
 
November 14, 2022 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:00 p.m.  
Present In Person:  
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Present Remotely:  
None 
Absent: 
 
 
None 
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY Subject: Written Liability Claim 
Against the City of Palo Alto By Steven and Catherine Popell (Claim No. 
C23-0007); Authority: Government Code Section 54956.9(e)(3) 
 
2. 
CONFERENCE WITH LABOR NEGOTIATORS   
City Designated Representatives: City Manager and his Designees 
Pursuant to Merit System Rules and Regulations (Ed Shikada, Kiely 
Nose, Sandra Blanch, Nicholas Raisch, Molly Stump, and Terence 
Howzell)  
Employee Organization: Service Employees International Union, 
(SEIU) Local 521, Utilities Management and Professional Association of 
Palo Alto (UMPAPA), Palo Alto Peace Officer’s Association (PAPOA), 
Palo 
Alto 
Police 
Management 
Association 
(PMA), 
International 
Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF) local 1319, Palo Alto Fire Chiefs 
Association (FCA); Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6 (a) 
 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Burt, to go 
into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:00 p.m.  
Council returned from Closed Session at 7:05 p.m.  
Mayor Burt announced there was no reportable action.  
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
 
Study Session 
3. 
Bi-Annual Discussion with the Independent Police Auditor 
City Manager Ed Shikada stated the contract with the Office of Independent 
Review (OIR), which serves as the Independent Police Auditor (IPA), 
includes a provision that the IPA join the City Council twice a year for 
discussion of trends in criminal justice and policing, policy and training 
matters, recommendations made by the consultants, and other Council 
concerns.  He noted that the contract specifies this session is not for the 
purpose of elaborating on published reviews of specific incidents and shall 
not include discussion of personnel matters prohibited by law.   
Independent Police Auditor OIR Consultant Mike Gennacco stated he would 
talk about the review process and answer questions about the most recent 
report released last month.  OIR has been the IPA for Palo Alto for 15 years, 
and Palo Alto is a leader in creating oversight for agencies.  OIR has 
identified 11 recommendations in the most recent report.   
Independent Police Auditor OIR Consultant Steve Connolly described the 
relationship with the police department as ongoing, particularly when new 
Internal Affairs cases or citizen complaints are entered into the system.  OIR 
is available on the website and serves as public liaison.  About 10 to 20 
people a year have questions about the process or want some assistance 
with a complaint.  OIR does not do independent investigations but can help 
bring issues to the department's attention.  When investigations are 
completed, OIR's role is to review them, having access to all the body-worn 
camera recordings and other investigative materials and the opportunity to 
consult with the department.  Individual cases are also reviewed twice a 
year with published summaries on the outcomes.  A lot of the 
recommendations are forward looking to improve systems.  Two primary 
divisions of cases are assessed, allegations of misconduct, either external or 
internal, and use of force reviews.  In this report, 15 individual matters were 
discussed: 8 misconduct allegations, 1 taser deployment, and 6 other force 
incidents.  OIR concurred with the outcomes in all cases and believed the 
department's investigative process was legitimate.  The most useful internal 
review processes go beyond the question of policy violation to anything else 
learned in the incident to address in terms of individual officer performance 
or policy clarification, and the department has done a better job of 
approaching these more comprehensively over the years.  One trend is the 
influence of body-worn cameras, which have had a significant impact on the 
investigative process.  Cases are resolved more efficiently because 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
everything the department needs to know to make an effective decision is 
available.  A lot of the cases are resolved at the supervisory inquiry level 
with appropriate outcomes, but if the body-worn camera tells a different 
story or it is more complicated, there is the possibility of a more 
comprehensive investigation.  BWCs are changing officer behavior and public 
behavior.  On occasion there is the possibility of offhand comments that do 
not reflect well on the officer or on the agency.  It is a common issue and 
less about disrespectful, unprofessional, or discourteous engagement with 
subjects the officers are in contact with than officer-on-officer conversation.  
All of this material is potentially discoverable and potentially a reflection on 
the department, which is important for the officers to remember.    
Mr. Gennacco stated conflict in allegations or complaints often involves those 
in a mental health crisis, under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or both.  
He stated the County and City are supportive with creating additional ways 
in which these individuals can be helped, assisted, and addressed through 
the co-responder model with mental health clinicians assisting the 
department.  One recommendation is to ensure every incident has more 
documentation about whether the clinician was called and if there was 
coverage.  It is important to know whether more resources should be 
dedicated to this model.  He believed there were times in which a clinician 
could have been helpful but was not available, but it was not very well 
documented.  OIR was optimistic about the co-responding model reducing 
uses of force or increasing the likelihood of the process going more smoothly 
if an individual needs to be committed on a 5150.  The recommendations in 
the report are evolved from the actual cases.  If there is something felt to be 
indicative of a larger systemic issue, a recommendation derived from the 
actual review of cases is offered.  This is intended as a forward-thinking 
model so that the next time the police department is challenged with a 
similar episode, they will be better prepared through different protocols to 
address it.  He offered to answer any questions the recommendations raised.  
He was pleased the police department provided a thoughtful response, 
largely agreeing with the recommendations.  He reviewed and discussed 3 
recommendations 
indicative 
of 
broader 
issues: 
communication 
with 
complainants, documentation of co-responder involvement, and holistic 
review of force.  Over the years, there has been dramatic improvement in 
the way in which the police department responds to complainants at the end 
of the investigation.  The department is starting to give the complainant a 
sense of what was done as part of the investigation.  Again, a step-up is 
needed because there are no protocols about how co-responders are 
documented.  It would be a more robust audit if that information was 
available.  State law now requires that deescalation techniques be featured 
in training.  There is an expectation that the review process of a force 
incident will contain an assessment about whether the officer used 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
deescalation techniques before going hands on or document that it was not 
feasible.  He emphasized the cooperation from the leadership of the police 
department and their thoughtful response whenever there is a report or an 
issue.  The input from the Police Association before finalization of the report 
is helpful and provides an opportunity to hear about the issues they may 
have.   
Mayor Burt requested comments from members of the public. 
Public Comment 
1. 
Aram James stated he pushed for the Independent Police Auditor in 
2007, but back then, the consultants met with the public.  He 
stated meeting only with the police department gives a one-sided 
perspective and recommended meetings with people in the 
community who may not be as happy with the police department as 
the police department is with itself.  He felt ending encryption was a 
good move for Chief Binder but stated he has been trying to find 
out more about an incident that occurred in October 2021 that was 
not covered in the report.  He stated the contract needs to be 
expanded considering the Racial and Identity Profiling Act.   
2. 
Winter Dellenbach felt Palo Alto was lucky to have an IPA.  She 
asked Council to formalize an ongoing set time to publically review 
and discuss the Palo Alto Police Department's use of force reports 
and response to the IPA's recommendations.  She stated these are 
both submitted at the same time the IPA submits their report but 
there is no formalization about when these will be discussed, which 
is important to achieve greater accountability and improvement in 
police practices.  She also asked to require that race and ethnicity 
be included for use of force incidents that do not go to the IPA for 
oversight and also for IPA reports not in the use of force reports.     
3. 
Liz Gardner discussed that her son was held up several months ago 
but she was not comfortable that she was not informed as a parent 
when they later went to her address and took her son to ID the 
individual.  She stated her son was also stopped coming home from 
work and detained and asked for identification.  She was not aware 
he had to carry identification on the street.  She recommended 
more oversight on socioeconomics in addition to race and ethnicity.   
4. 
Tulin Melton, a volunteer with the Bill Wilson Center, a local 
nonprofit working to end youth and family homelessness, described 
that November is Runaway and Homeless Youth Prevention Month, 
a nationwide campaign to increase awareness about homeless 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
youth and young adults in the community.  Santa Clara County has 
the fourth highest population of homeless individuals in the nation, 
and California has the highest rate of unaccompanied homeless 
youth, with 2500 homeless students enrolled in grades K through 
12.  Bill Wilson has been serving Santa Clara County for over 45 
years, and the goal is to provide an integrated system of care to 
help homeless youth attain stable housing either through family 
reunification or economic self-sufficiency.  She listed the services 
offered and encouraged reaching out to the agency, visiting the 
website at www.billwilsoncenter.org, and referring young people in 
need of support to 408-385-2400.   
5. 
Severiano Ortiz wondered what the deescalation techniques were 
and also for what type of mental health issue co-responders are 
used.  He asked how many cases are reviewed by the IPA during 
each review.   
Mayor Burt stated Staff would be able to assist Mr. Ortiz with those 
answers.   
Council Member Cormack felt it was important to hear that OIR concurred 
with the outcomes of the department's internal findings and that the process 
is legitimate.  She expected the department to maintain that level.  She 
asked about trends in the use of tasers and their effectiveness.   
Mr. Gennacco stated tasers can be effective, but it is important that 
everyone understands when it is appropriate to use the taser.  When the 
Council determined it was appropriate to authorize the use of tasers for the 
department in 2007, it was approved provided the IPA reviewed those uses.  
Even under the ideal situation, there are times in which they do not resolve 
the situation and another option has to be used.  The most important thing 
is not whether they are authorized, but ensuring they are only used under 
the appropriate circumstances.   
Council Member Cormack asked if the reason for being more careful is that 
some people have been injured by tasers.   
Mr. Gennacco stated not in Palo Alto but in other jurisdictions, there have 
been very unfortunate circumstances in which individuals have been 
significantly harmed because of using the taser in an inappropriate way, for 
example taser applications of people in an elevated position or on a bicycle.   
Council Member Cormack asked if OIR had seen that there have been fewer 
shootings because tasers are available to the police force.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
Mr. Gennacco stated there have been times in which the use of a taser 
ended the conflict rather than requiring a higher level of force, but it does 
not always work that way.  Sometimes the taser does not work or the 
application misses, so officers need to be prepared to shift to another option.   
Council Member Cormack was troubled by some of the language 
documented over the years.  She asked if other jurisdictions address this 
more proactively.   
Mr. Gennacco stated the policy is there, but the question is the enforcement 
and identification of times in which individuals either use profanity or make 
unprofessional comments.  An officer making an unprofessional comment 
filled with profanity can lead to the impression that the officer is angry or 
has lost control.  Those potential impressions are one of the reasons to pay 
attention.   
Mr. Connolly added there has been a significant improvement in the 
department's willingness to engage with that issue.  It is something the 
agency takes seriously.   
Council Member Cormack stated she would look forward to continued 
improvement.  She asked, looking forward, what emerging areas should be 
focused on to ensure the department is being trained correctly. 
Mr. Gennacco stated after 2+ years of downtime, when it was very difficult 
to do tactical training and deploy scenario-based training, training needs to 
be reinvigorated.  This department trains their people quite well with a very 
effective comprehensive training program.   
Mr. Connolly added that mental health is important in terms of changing the 
dynamics.  He suggested every officer in the Palo Alto Police Department be 
trained in crisis intervention.   
Council Member Stone asked the City Manager if the biannual meetings with 
the IPA to discuss their reports is the setting to discuss the police 
department's use of force or if that would be agendized in the future.   
City Manager Shikada stated there was an outstanding referral from the City 
Council to bring that topic to the Policy and Services Committee.  Staff is 
evaluating how best to accomplish that.   
Council Member Stone asked what training and remediation occurs to 
address those offhand remarks caught on body-worn cameras.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
Police Chief Andrew Binder stated when the review process takes place, 
depending on whether it is a one-off or an ongoing problem, it is brought to 
the officer's attention, with providing counseling, setting expectations, and 
providing training if necessary.   
Council Member Stone related a case when he worked in the District 
Attorney's office that had to be dismissed rather than being put in front of a 
jury because of the absurdity of the conversation recorded between officers.  
He stated this issue goes beyond remarks that could be embarrassing for the 
department and could harm prosecution in the future.  He asked if the 
department would implement the recommendations regarding documenting 
mental health calls and whether mental health professionals are being 
called.   
Chief Binder thought there was room to improve on documentation but felt 
the department did a good job of involving mental health advocates and 
other teams.  He stated they are working toward making sure there is a 
clear picture of cases during the review process.   
City Manager Shikada added that his office was also engaged with County 
Behavioral Health as well as the County Executive's office on exploring 
options for better communication and coordination between the various 
services.  The law enforcement and non-law enforcement responses have 
operated largely independently to this point.  In many circumstances, the 
behavioral health response would like to be separate from any law 
enforcement response, so this is a complex area that will require additional 
coordination between agencies to ensure respecting boundaries while 
optimizing coordination.   
Council Member Stone believed the RIPA data would be beneficial for the 
community and the department to be able to identify any biases in policing.  
He asked if similar data was collected for the use of force reports. 
Chief Binder was supportive of collecting race and ethnicity data.  He 
questioned the best time and place to give that data and stated one of the 
challenges with only 4 uses of force was the small sample size as there is an 
argument that the data could be misconstrued.  In addition to the RIPA data, 
the police department was supportive of providing that detail.   
Council Member Stone thought it was important data to have and felt there 
would be better understanding of potential trends through the IPA's review.  
He asked if that demographic data was being used in other cities.   
Mr. Gennacco stated it varies.  Some agencies report use of force.  In 
smaller agencies with not many times in which force was used, the sample 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
size gets too small for there to be any meaningful analysis.  OIR does not 
report it because the number is so small that it may be statistically 
insignificant.   
Vice Mayor Kou asked if body-worn cameras were used 100% of the time or 
if there were times somebody might forget to turn it on.   
Chief Binder stated there is always human error involved but found through 
administrative review of the cases that they were being used.   
Vice Mayor Kou stated the audits have been great information and that it 
would be valuable for the public to see how the police department is 
performing and the responses they have been getting.  She hoped Ms. 
Dellenbach's comments and suggestions would be considered.   
Council Member DuBois was generally satisfied with the audits and response.  
Regarding adding demographic data to use of force reports, he understood 
the point that it was a small sample but felt starting it and building it up 
over time would be useful.  He felt the article in The Weekly was interesting 
and showed the complexity in analyzing some of the data.  It was discussed 
at the time of the contract about potentially doing some kind of process 
audit.  Some past ideas were looking at body-worn cameras, when they are 
on, and a comparison to best practices in other cities.   
Mr. Gennacco stated one reason OIR was in town was to do an audit on 
hiring and recruiting, and that report will be available in the very near 
future.  He stated they just completed an audit for the City of Burbank on 
the degree to which body-worn cameras are being used and found that 
insightful.  Anecdotally based on the small sample of cases reviewed, there 
has been good compliance with body-worn cameras on at the appropriate 
times.   
City Attorney Molly Stump suggested agendizing this the next time IPA 
comes to Council in a way that would allow for this discussion.  
Council Member DuBois suggested laying out ideas tonight for a proposal for 
that next audit to be ready to engage on it next time.  He stated he would 
be interested if, the next time OIR came back, there was a definite proposal 
of an area they thought there would be value in auditing.  He mentioned 
body-worn cameras.  He felt it would be good to begin to get ideas in one 
meeting, come back 6 months later, and then deliver it 6 months later.   
Mr. Gennacco stated there was previously discussion about doing an audit of 
the training programs done by the police department.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
Mayor Burt suggested routinely agendizing a discussion of potential scope of 
work of upcoming audits.  He requested Staff recommendations regarding 
obtaining meaningful demographic analysis on the use of force.  He was 
interested in what portion of the mental and behavioral health calls were not 
able to met by the current staffing.    
Chief Binder stated half of the PERT team was lost with the behavioral health 
clinician leaving, so there is more reliance on MCRT through the County, 
which is a great resource but not always available and shared with other 
agencies within the County.  He stated all officers are crisis intervention 
trained and do a good job of handling these mental health response calls 
when other resources are not available.   
Mayor Burt was struck by how the current requirements and accountability 
seem to be driving better performance and not interfering with officers' 
ability to provide the public safety and law enforcement they must do.   
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
There were none. 
Public Comment  
1. 
Matt Schlegel thanked city staff, council members, and community 
members for their work on formulating the SCAP plan, specifically the 
heat pump water heater pilot program.  He stated it was clear from 
the climate summit hosted at Gunn High School last weekend that the 
region and the world are looking to Palo Alto for leadership in reducing 
carbon emissions at the community level.  The pilot program has a 
goal to replace 1000 fossil-fuel-burning water heaters in the 2023.  He 
expected City Manager Shikada and his team to report progress on the 
program, to highlight any obstacles encountered, and to ask for any 
help needed to achieve the goal.  He was unclear on the plan to raise 
awareness in the community and promote this program to all eligible 
residents.  Only 100 residents took advantage of the rebate program 
to install heat pump water heaters in the past, so what was done in 
the past will not suffice to meet the new goal.  He requested a plan to 
communicate the new program to all Palo Alto residents in a manner 
that will not only enable reaching the goal in 2023 but will scale to 
2000 replacements in 2024.  He would like to see a plan before the 
heat pump water heater program starts in January, so no time is 
wasted and not one fossil fuel gas water heater is installed because a 
resident did not know that this program is available.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
2. 
Aram James referenced a recent article that featured Judge Cordell, in 
which she was quoted as saying, "I think it's appropriate to conclude 
that there is a problem with racial profiling in Palo Alto, and I am very 
concerned because the data is very disturbing to me."  Later in the 
report, it says Police Chief Binder declined to discuss the RIPA data in 
a recent interview and said it represents only a snapshot in time.  Mr. 
James stated that is not true and that it covers all of the stops for 
those 3 months.  He stated when he has been pulled over in the past, 
he has never been asked to get out of the car and sit on the curb, but 
he has many times seen young African American males and other 
people of color pulled out of the car by the PAPD and sitting on the 
curb, which does not get reported in the RIPA report.  He believed 
Chief Binder was not transparent and that the RIPA data would show a 
consistent pattern over the years.   
3. 
Liz Gardner stated a couple weeks ago during a heavy rain, at least 70 
seniors were left waiting in the rain for a lunch at the senior center 
Avenidas. She highlighted that many low-income seniors rely on this 
midday meal not only to sustain them but also to socialize with other 
seniors who have been isolated.  She asked the City to agendize this 
and look into what is going on.   
Consent Calendar 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 4-8. 
4. 
Approval of Contract Amendment #3 to Contract Number C16166822 
with ARC Document Solutions for Copiers/Printers to Extend the Term 
of the Contract for Three Additional Years and to Decrease the Annual 
Amount by $102,068 to $306,000 Per Year and a Total Contract Not to 
Exceed amount of $2,835,340 
5. 
Approval of a Construction Contract with Anderson Pacific Engineering 
Construction in the Amount of $6,070,000; Authorization for the City 
Manager or Their Designee to Negotiate and Execute Change Orders 
up to a Not-to-Exceed Amount of $607,000; Approval of Amendment 
#1 to Contract Number C21176592C with Carollo Engineers to Add 
Services, to Increase Compensation by $604,246 for a New Maximum 
Compensation Not-to-Exceed $604,247 for the Wastewater Treatment 
Fund for the 12kV Electrical Power Distribution Loop Rehabilitation Bid 
Package 1 Project funded by the Plant Repair, Retrofit, and Equipment 
Replacement Project (WQ-19002) at the Regional Water Quality 
Control Plant 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
6. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of Nine Ordinances That Repeal and 
Adopt Various Sections of the Palo Alto Municipal Code (PAMC) Related 
to the 2022 CA Building Codes (CA Code of Regulations Title 24) 
Update and Proposed Local Amendments, including: (1) Chapter 15.04 
Incorporating the 2022 CA Fire Code With Local Amendments; (2) 
Chapter 16.04 Incorporating the 2022 CA Building Code With Local 
Amendments; 
(3) 
Chapter 
16.05 
Incorporating 
the 
2022 
CA 
Mechanical Code With Local Amendments; (4) Chapter 16.06 
Incorporating the 2022 CA Residential Code With Local Amendments 
and Amending Chapter 16.52 to Align Federal, State, and Local Flood 
Hazard Regulations; (5) Chapter 16.08 Incorporating the 2022 CA 
Plumbing 
Code 
With 
Local 
Amendments; 
(6) 
Chapter 
16.16 
Incorporating the 2022 CA Electrical Code With Local Amendments; 
(7) Chapter 16.18 Incorporating the 2021 International Swimming 
Pool and Spa Code With Local Amendments; (8) Chapter 16.14 
Incorporating the 2022 CA Green Building Standards Code with Local 
Amendments; (9) Chapter 16.17 Incorporating the 2022 CA Energy 
Code Without Local Amendments. Environmental Assessment:  Project 
is Exempt Under CA Environmental Quality Act CEQA Guidelines 
Sections 15061(b)(3) and 15308 (FIRST READING: October 17, 2022 
PASSED: 7-0). 
7. 
Adoption of a Resolution for the Santa Clara County Historical Heritage 
Grant Program Authorizing the Application and Receipt of Grant Funds 
by the City of Palo Alto for the Roth Building (300 Homer Ave) 
Windows Rehabilitation & Restoration 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
City Manager Comments 
 
 
Ed Shikada, City Manager, gave a coronavirus update regarding testing sites 
and vaccine recommendations.  He discussed the past weekend's delegation 
from Bloomington, Indiana, and a Climate Collaboration Summit.  He 
reviewed upcoming road and pedestrian lane closures, library service 
enhancements, a new shuttle service, and workshop on the topic of car-free 
streets.  He discussed upcoming agenda items for the City Council, with no 
meeting on November 21 and returning on November 28.   
Mayor Burt stated there was a lot of confusion on the Caltrain construction 
and the closures were thought more significant than they actually are.  He 
asked for maps or better clarity on those closures.  
City Manager Shikada described that at Churchill by Palo Alto Convention 
running east-west, work will be done on the gates.  While work is done on 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
the north side of the street, there will be no pedestrians or cyclists allowed 
but the south side of the street will remain open, and vice versa.   
Mayor Burt wanted to make it clear that pedestrians will be able to cross at 
all those times and that it is limited crossing as opposed to complete closure.   
Action Items 
8. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Staff Recommend the City Council Review the North 
Ventura Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP) Refined Preferred Alternative 
and Endorse the Refined Preferred Alternative Plan. 
Mayor Burt stated public comments have already been taken and this item 
was proceeding to the phase of Council discussion.  The Council provided 
several questions, to which the Staff has provided responses in the item #8 
Staff report.   
Planner Sheldon Ah Sing reminded the Council that they already endorsed a 
preferred alternative in January 2022, and Staff was looking for discrete 
updates on the plans with confirmation on 4 items: the height transitions 
along El Camino Real; additional height for the affordable housing site 
adjacent to the Cannery; the office and research and development 
employment density; and implementation of parking maximums.  He gave 
options and details for each of these items.   
Mayor Burt, regarding the additional height for the affordable housing site, 
questioned why the alternatives posed were 3 or 7 stories when the 
previously endorsed heights were for a 5-story residential or 6-story 
residential mixed use.   
Director Jonathan Lait, Planning and Development Services, stated Council 
has already endorsed 5 stories residential or 6 stories with ground-floor 
retail.  Staff was now inquiring about considering 1 story for retail or 
possibly 2 for parking.   
Mayor Burt stated the plan Council had tentatively supported did not 
envision retail, so the choice was the height of the building, how many 
stories of housing that would enable, and how much parking would be 
necessary for that.   
Director Lait discussed the possibility of additional off-street public parking 
because of AB2097.  The area is within a half mile radius of the Caltrain 
station, and it is conceivable that new development could be built without 
parking.    
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
Mayor Burt asked if under AB2097 the City would be allowed to charge 
parking fees.   
Director Lait believed that was correct.  There was further discussion about 
parking requirements and impact fees.   
Mayor Burt stated if there were Residential Permit Parking programs that did 
not allow spillover into surrounding neighborhoods and if a development was 
created using AB2097 to avoid parking on their development, the City 
conceivably could charge for parking. In reference to increasing the housing 
density on the east side of Park Boulevard, he felt it was a good site for 
high-density 
housing 
without 
significant 
impact 
on 
adjacent 
R1 
neighborhoods.  He was interested in focusing on any parcels there that 
would be candidates and putting zoning incentives in to take advantage of 
that.  He asked what was envisioned for the Page Mill site in the tentatively 
endorsed plan.   
Mr. Ah Sing anticipated there would be some redevelopment there with 
some of the surface parking to be redeveloped as housing, but property 
owners would require more office.   
Mayor Burt stated changes have occurred since the NVCAP concluded its 
work.  With more office workers utilizing the hybrid work model since the 
pandemic, an employer can employ more employees in the same amount of 
square footage.  There is now a cool-down in the office market because of 
interest rates and the value of existing offices showing rapid decline.  The 
economics of building new office are changing.  In the past, developers 
would not add housing without being able to add more office.  He did not 
believe that was the case now.  He stated the land was underutilized, with a 
big parcel that could have high-density housing and very good return on 
investment.  He wanted to see that parcel and the ones on Park up-zoned 
for high-density housing.   
Council Member Stone asked for an example of a successful enforceable TDM 
program in Palo Alto and how to measure success and replicate that here.   
Director Lait stated because it is a relatively new provision of the code, there 
have not been a lot of projects that have required TDMs as part of an 
entitlement process.  Two years after a TDM plan is implemented, Staff does 
the first review, so there is a lag period before the inspection. Diminished 
Staff resources have not recovered to the pre-pandemic levels.   
Council Member Stone asked if demolishing 40% of a building eligible for 
listing on the California Historical Registry removes that eligibility.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
Director Lait stated that it does remove eligibility and that demolition of 
portions of the cannery building was identified as significant unavoidable 
impact and an unmitigable loss to that resource. It will necessitate the 
Council to adopt a statement of overriding considerations because the public 
benefits would outweigh the loss of that historic resource.  There are a lot of 
components to that project, which the Council will have a chance to 
consider, that seek to recognize and pay tribute to the cultural significance 
of that site.  The Council could sit in judgment as to whether that goes far 
enough when that project comes before it.   
Council Member Stone agreed with Mayor Burt regarding Park Boulevard 
being a good opportunity for increased density.  He saw no problem with 
raising the maximum height to higher than 35 feet to be more compatible 
with the surrounding buildings.  He suggested lowering the height for the 
buildings behind El Camino adjacent to the R1 residential units, which is 
proposed at 45 feet.   
Director Lait stated Staff felt the properties near El Camino were more ripe 
for redevelopment and that lowering the height may not result in timely 
redevelopment.   
Council Member Stone supported increased height for the affordable housing 
project but did not favor ground-floor retail if it would cut into affordable 
housing units.  He was interested in the parking to be able to offset some 
loss to commercial and especially to ensure adequate parking for the 
residents of that affordable housing.  He stated studies have shown low-
income earners rely on their vehicles more than higher-income earners.    
Council Member DuBois asked Mayor Burt for clarification on what he was 
suggesting for the Park Boulevard sites.   
Mayor Burt stated he assumed it would be on the sites that have not been 
recently redeveloped.   
Council Member DuBois questioned the idea behind the maximum parking 
level.   
Mr. Ah Sing stated the goal is not to have oversupply of parking throughout 
the area.  The parking maximum supports some of the other goals and 
policies in the Comp Plan and SCAP.   
Council Member DuBois did not want to a state a maximum if a developer 
needed more parking for their project to be successful.  He felt maybe the 
City should be proactive to create Residential Parking Permits on the street.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
Director Lait stated this was a mixed-use area with a blend of commercial 
and residential.  The conversation of the City proactively implementing an 
RPP in a neighborhood came up with the Castilleja School.  When the City 
surveyed neighbors in that area, there was not support for it despite 
concerns expressed throughout public hearings.  That is a policy 
consideration for the Council. 
Council Member DuBois stated there should be a plan on how to use the 
street.  The City cannot mandate that a commercial building provide parking, 
but if they had nowhere else to park, they would have to provide parking on 
the property.  He stated he would love to hear more about creative solutions 
in terms of the TDM question; the TDM route would need to be ironclad.  He 
asked if the 20% BMR in the original report was in accordance with the 
Nexus study.   
Director Lait stated that study on how to increase the inclusionary 
requirements found that, at the development standards in place, there were 
some constraints in the ability to go up to 20%.  In this area, the idea is to 
allow for greater development potential to allow for the increased margin to 
provide for the affordable housing.   
Council Member DuBois stated for a 35-foot zone, he could see going to 50 
or, for 100% affordable, 55 feet but the jump to 75 or 80 feet seemed like a 
lot.  He also wondered about packet page 175 showing the base zoning for 
several buildings going to 55 feet versus the 50-foot city limit.   
Mr. Ah Sing stated that came from direction from the Council on the 
endorsed plan in January, which allowed these heights and additional height 
for 100% affordable housing.  The Council has already endorsed 60 or 65 
feet with the 1 floor of retail and 5 stories above, but as retail may not be 
appropriate, it would be a 5-story building, roughly 55 feet.   
Council Member DuBois was worried about traffic congestion in this area.  He 
felt it was critical that Portage connects to Park Boulevard and that vehicles 
have the option of going to California Avenue, Oregon Expressway, or El 
Camino.  He was concerned about the idea of the woonerf on Portage, which 
would be more bike than car oriented, and the other streets being private 
Sobrato roads.  He asked if there had been a traffic analysis yet for the 
woonerf.   
Mr. Ah Sing stated that was ongoing with discussion on integrating all the 
components.  Given the open space in the park and the naturalization of that 
creek, it is a good transportation piece to have.  Vehicles can still go through 
but with more priority and safety toward cyclists and pedestrians.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
Director Lait stated it goes back to the earlier foundational direction for 
developing the NVCAP and focusing on mobility and different ways to move 
through the area.  It was identified in the public process as a desirable street 
concept at in proximity to what might be a future park.   
Council Member DuBois stated the residents of the 1-acre of affordable 
housing would be prioritized to go to El Camino and the townhomes from 
Sobrato on the other side would be directed mostly to Park Boulevard.  He 
stated it seemed the concept from the NVCAP was mixed with the Sobrato 
project and was concerned about how people would actually get around in 
those areas.   
Director Lait stated it will be studied and this is before Council to make sure 
the right plan and scenarios are studied.   
Council Member DuBois asked if negative impact on residents a reason can 
be to require a commercial building to provide parking.   
Director Lait stated the law sets forth 3 reasons a city could begin to impose 
parking.  One was if the housing project has an impact on the housing or 
commercial parking resources in the area, but the state law also has an 
exception to that rule that exempts a number of housing projects from being 
subject to that requirement.   
City Attorney Stump stated the exceptions were significant and would 
remove almost all housing projects from being able to use that adverse 
impact.   
Council Member DuBois was concerned about making sure those residents 
can get around and park and did not want to cause conflict with commercial 
users trying to park on the streets. 
Director Lait stated it would be a good time for the Council to provide 
direction with respect to the woonerf design.   
Council Member Filseth concurred that the space between Park Street and 
the train tracks was a good place to build higher and denser.  Some of these 
buildings are more recent and may not turn over that quickly even if 65 or 
75 feet is allowed in that location.  He supported loosening design 
restrictions in that stripe.  He did not think the maximum parking made 
sense because no developer wants to put in more parking than they need 
and it would deter development.  He suspected the 1 acre the City got would 
not be an attractive location for retail and would be better used as affordable 
housing.  He felt it was a bad location for 7 stories and that TDM should not 
be counted on.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
Vice Mayor Kou stated felt it was a problem hat the cannery would not be 
eligible for the National Historic Registry after losing 40%.  She understood 
that with historical sites, the property and not just the building was of 
significance and wondered how everything being built would affect it.  
Regarding TDMs, she agreed that the general public has not seen they are 
actually working and would not agree with TDM until there is something 
more decisive.  She concurred that height could be increased between Park 
and the railroad but felt transitional heights should not impact R1 
neighborhoods.  She concurred with keeping it at 50 feet, or 55 for 100% 
affordable, but wanted to see it below 80% Area Median Income.  She added 
that she was incredibly perturbed with how the cannery was being treated 
and felt it was dishonorable to the importance of Chinese businessman 
Thomas Foon Chew.   
Director Lait stated the Council gave prior direction on the 1-acre site to go 
to 65 feet with ground-floor retail.  The Council's interest to stay at 55 feet 
for a 5-story affordable housing project was the feedback needed.  He 
agreed retail was not feasible at that location but there might be interest in 
a 2-level at-grade parking with 5 stories on top.  On the transitional heights, 
the Architectural Review Board suggested the additional height would allow 
another story, which is a policy call for the Council.  The TDM plan was in 
response to the City Council's ask to figure out how to have low-density R&D 
zones in this area.  There is not a great answer to enforce or regulate that, 
and a robust TDM plan is the best option right now.  Staff has not found in 
the planning literature any material or tools to get to where the Council 
wants on a low-density employment zone.  The TDM would get at the same 
issue by trying to limit the number of vehicles approaching the site.  He 
asked what other ideas the Council might have.  On the historic cannery 
site, Staff has released an environmental document concluding that the 
project for the townhome development would result in a significant 
environmental impact.  The alternative project includes the same sort of 
removal of a portion of the cannery building and adds a number of other 
components being studied in the environmental impact report, and again, 
the conclusion is that demolishing that much of the building takes the 
building itself out of being eligible for listing.  In this case, the building and 
the site are both part of what makes this particular area significant from a 
historic standpoint.  The intent behind the restoration of the monitor roofs 
and other features of the physical building construction is to do it in a 
manner consistent with the architecture and essence of the building.  In 
addition, to honor the history of the site, there has been talk of an outdoor 
plaza, outdoor public art that shows the history, access to the trussed 
ceilings that give the public a chance to celebrate what has taken place 
there.  While it is not eligible for listing, there are a number of aspects the 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
City is saying are important and need to be incorporated into it.  The Council 
will decide whether that is a good deal for the City.   
Council Member Cormack asked whether eliminating the parking minimums 
means the City can no longer require parking spaces within the building 
footprint and what that means for all the single-family homes within area.   
Director Lait stated that a new housing development would not be subject to 
a parking requirement.   
Council Member Cormack suggested including that in the description.   
Mayor Burt stated, regarding locations on Park Boulevard that might be 
candidates for housing, there were several locations with newer multistory 
buildings with significant surface parking lots because of the floor area ratios 
in that zoning.  If the City allows housing on those sites, developers have to 
figure out how they would park it.  He mentioned the south edge of that 
substation being where the landing area for a bicycle bridge or underpass at 
Alma and the tracks is envisioned and questioned the prospects.  He asked if 
there was a possibility to set up a local historic designation for the cannery 
site to assure it could not be demolished by future property owner.   
Director Lait stated local designation could be looked at to require Council 
approval for demolition.   
Mayor Burt raised a question of whether it would be legally permissible to 
establish affordable housing standards favoring social and economic diversity 
for previously disenfranchised communities. 
City Attorney Stump stated the issue is complicated and recommended that 
Council look at this from a broader standpoint than just this specific planning 
area.   
Director Lait stated there will be an opportunity in 2 weeks' time to weigh in 
on that in a draft housing element presentation.  Having a program that 
directs Staff to explore that issue can be embedded into the housing element 
and implemented going forward.  
City Attorney Stump stated it would require some study, gathering of data, 
and careful design. 
Mayor Burt stated it would be valuable citywide but particularly in certain 
areas of the community, including this particular neighborhood.  Regarding 
the TDM issues, with AB2097, there are no longer many tools to reduce 
parking and traffic. If TDM measures can accomplish reductions, they can 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
have strong impacts.  Other locations have had successful TDM programs, 
and in Palo Alto, there is a strong TMA in the Stanford Research Park.  
Subsidized transit passes have worked there.  The VTA SmartPass is $8 a 
month or less, and the 522 and 22 bus route system is frequent and strong.  
He was positive about the opportunities because they reduce parking, traffic, 
and greenhouse gases.  He stated these needed to be implemented to show 
the community how effective they are and improve confidence in doing them 
throughout the community.  He suggested providing examples of effective 
TDM programs elsewhere in 2 weeks when discussing the housing element.   
MOTION:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Mayor Burt, to 
endorse the refined preferred alternative plan with the following changes:  
 
A. 
Allow 45 feet height transition on El Camino 
 
B. 
55 feet for 100% affordable site at 340 Portage without retail  
 
C. 
Define strict TDM and evaluate a city initiated RPP district to 
protect residential parking  
D. 
Evaluate removing the woonerf to decrease congestion as an 
option in the EIR 
E. 
No parking maximums 
F. 
Raise the height limit along Park Boulevard to 55 feet   
MOTION PASSED: 5-2, Tanaka, Filseth no   
There was discussion on Council Member DuBois's motion, including 
clarification on the heights.   
Mayor Burt asked how to give direction to begin evaluating how to allow for 
additive housing on commercial parcels surface parking adjacent to a 
multistory office so the office can continue but with a bonus from housing 
development.  
Director Lait did not have an answer but suggested putting it in the motion 
to look at ranges and study those in the plan.   
There was discussion about zoning and potential zoning changes for this 
area.  
Philip Kamhi, Chief Transportation Official, noted there is a current ordinance 
for establishing Residential Preferential Permit districts, which states 
nonresident vehicles need to be substantially interfering with the use of 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
parking spaces available for neighborhood residents and other alternative 
parking strategies must be evaluated first.  It is a process initiated by 
residents and typically not something that happens ahead of parking impacts 
being experienced.   
Council Member DuBois stated there is an option for the city to initiate an 
RPP and that this would be in order to be prepared to do it quickly if needed.   
Mayor Burt stated with AB2097, development can be constructed with no 
onsite parking and the need to have RPPs as protections is likely to increase 
as a result.  He requested to add Item G as an opportunity to get additional 
housing in the NVCAP area sooner without imposing on low-density housing.  
MOTION: Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Stone, to add:  
G. Request Staff to evaluate zoning changes that would increase FAR 
for housing on commercial sites along Park Boulevard and Page 
Mill Road  
Council Member Cormack asked Staff to address how G differs from the 
alternatives Council has already rejected. 
Mr. Ah Sing stated there was not a direction to change from the preferred 
alternative.   
Director Lait stated Staff had previously contemplated various alternatives of 
housing at the Cloudera site.  It was not thought the Park sites would be 
developed in the planning horizon, so they were not considered.  The 
additive FAR makes that feasible, and depending on AB2097, a housing 
development presumably could be built on the parking lots.  The commercial 
building is not going to come down.  It would be a new housing 
development, presumably without parking.   
Mayor Burt clarified without mandated parking.  He did not expect there 
would be a lot of developments that lack any parking.  It would be up to the 
developer to decide how much parking they need to accommodate their 
residents as opposed to the City setting standards.   
Director Lait stated the NVCAP anticipates 528 new housing units.  He asked 
whether Council wants to create more opportunities for housing to be built, 
keeping the same number of units, or to increase the projected amount of 
housing in the NVCAP area by expanding to the Cloudera and Park Boulevard 
sites.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
Mayor Burt stated he envisioned the motion as potentially additive, 
something in between the original alternatives, looking at adding housing 
without adding jobs.   
Council Member Cormack stated she would support Item G, but it would be 
important for Staff to let Council know if this changes the time frame and 
cost.   
Mayor Burt suggested an EIR covering what is presently identified that could 
be updated if that number would be exceeded.  
MOTION PASSED:  5-2, DuBois, Kou no 
Council Member Cormack stated she would vote against the original motion 
as the proposed NVCAP goals included adding to the City's supply of 
multifamily housing and it was not anticipated there would be significant 
turnover or growth in the plan area.  She did not feel it would achieve the 
goals. 
Council Member Stone asked if, for Item B, 55 feet allowed for parking that 
was discussed.   
Director Lait stated parking would have to be accommodated either at or 
below grade.   
MOTION: Council Member Stone moved, seconded by Council Member 
Cormack to amend item B to 65 feet for parking  
Council Member Stone felt this was a unique opportunity for the City to be 
able to make up for some under-parking to help nearby residents and retial 
shoppers.   
Council Member Cormack stated forcing parking to be underground will add 
cost to the affordable housing.  Making it less expensive will make it more 
likely to get built sooner, and the more the flexibility for the future developer 
at this site, the better.   
Council Member Tanaka suggested lowering the 100% affordable because 
nobody would build it.   
Council Member DuBois stated most of the affordable housing has parking 
on ground floor and does not go up to 65 feet.  He stated it was a question 
of height and impacts on the park.  There would be a tradeoff of fewer units 
with 55 versus 65 feet.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
Council Member Filseth noted this is on city land and office buildings should 
not be put there.  The argument from 55 to 65 is no different from the 
argument from 65 to 75 and so forth.  He stated in this location, the extra 
height does not justify the tradeoff.   
Mayor Burt stated this area is subject to groundwater contamination that 
makes underground parking even less economical.  On that basis, he would 
support the motion.   
MOTION PASSED:  5-2, Filseth, DuBois no 
Director Lait stipulated that it is a 5-story residential building above a 1-
story garage for a total of 65 feet.   
Council Member Filseth asked it if would be specified that the raised height 
limit on Park Boulevard was strictly for residential.   
Council Member DuBois was open to saying additional height above 35 feet 
would be for housing.   
Mayor Burt stated FAR would not be increased for commercial, so it would be 
office on a smaller footprint and more space for residential.  There was 
further discussion on the wording of Item F.  
Council Member Filseth stated that, on the issue of Item C, AB2097 is really 
saying it is not necessary to build parking.  He felt it should be clear that to 
make that work, street parking must be limited or even banned in this 
neighborhood 
and 
prevented 
from 
spilling 
over 
into 
the 
Ventura 
neighborhood.  Developers can decide how much parking they want to put in 
for their tenants, but it must be clear that street parking is not going to be 
an option for people.   
Vice Mayor Kou asked the maker and the seconder to consider adding an 
Item H to include that Staff will review and return with a recommendation 
about designating 340 Portage as a historical site.   
Council Member Dubois and Mayor Burt accepted that.   
There was further discussion on the wording of Item F.   
Vice Mayor Kou asked to consider including language in Item A that would 
exclude low-density or single-family properties backing up to El Camino from 
the transitional height.   
Council Member Dubois stated that was the point of this.  There are only a 
few places it applies, and it is either 45 or 35 feet.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
Vice Mayor Kou had concerns about the impacts to existing R1 or low-
density there and requested to separate that in the motion.   
Council Member Tanaka requested to split Items B and E for voting also.   
Director Lait asked for clarification on whether Item D sought to create a 
cut-through street or extend a regular street to the project site.   
Council Member DuBois replied that it was to evaluate both.  
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING:  Council Member DuBois 
moved, seconded by Mayor Burt, to endorse the refined preferred alternative 
plan with the following changes: 
A. 
Allow 45 feet height transition on El Camino 
 
MOTION PASSED: 5-2, Filseth, Kou no 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING:  Council Member DuBois 
moved, seconded by Mayor Burt, to endorse the refined preferred alternative 
plan with the following changes: 
B. 
65 feet for 100% affordable site at 340 Portage without retail (to 
include 5 stories of residential, with 1 level for parking)   
 
E. 
No parking maximums 
MOTION PASSED: 5-2, Tanaka, Filseth no 
MOTION:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to 
endorse the refined preferred alternative plan with the following changes:  
 
A. 
Allow 45 feet height transition on El Camino 
 
B. 
65 feet for 100% affordable site at 340 Portage without retail, (to 
include 5 stories of residential, with 1 level for parking)   
 
C. 
Define strict TDM and evaluate a city initiated RPP district to 
protect residential parking  
D. 
Evaluate removing the woonerf to decrease congestion as an 
option in the EIR 
E. 
No parking maximums 
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
F. 
Raise the height limit along Park Boulevard to 55 feet for 
residential or residential mixed use without increasing commercial 
FAR 
G. 
Request Staff to evaluate zoning changes that would increase FAR 
for housing on commercial sites along Park Boulevard and Page 
Mill Road  
H. 
Staff will review and return with recommendation about 
designation of 340 Portage Road as a historical resource   
MOTION PASSED:  6-1, Cormack no 
9. 
City Council discussion and direction regarding wage requirements for 
the contract for next janitorial services 
A. 
Review and Provide Direction on Wage and Benefits Requirements 
for Inclusion in a New Janitorial Services Request for Proposal 
(RFP) 
B. 
Responsible Contracting Standards Colleague's Memo (Stone & 
Burt) 
ACTION: This item was continued to a future meeting  
City Manager Shikada recommended to defer Items 9A and 9B.  Recognizing 
a number of time-sensitive items on the upcoming agenda, Staff will find a 
new date for this item to be heard.  The current contract runs through 
February 2023, so the time required to do a new procurement is already 
constrained.  Staff will come back with a recommendation to extend the 
existing contract to allow the Council to consider policy options and to 
complete a procurement process.   
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member DuBois stated the weekend's climate summit was excellent.  
Students did a lot of work helping to lead it, and it was a very positive 
event.  He thanked the mayor for pushing to pull that off in a short period of 
time.  He recognized Andy Reid, the Rotary Club, and everyone involved in 
the sibling city events over the weekend. He welcomed the new council 
members.  
Vice Mayor Kou thanked Staff and wished them Happy Thanksgiving.  She 
enjoyed the Veterans Day Memorial and thanked Staff, especially Nathan 
Rainey, for their work.   
DRAFT SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 25 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  11/14/2022 
Mayor Burt stated the Bloomington sibling city events were great and 
solidified that relationship.  He felt it was to how this has quickly spread 
from being Sibling Cities USA combined with Neighbors Abroad to different 
service organizations, concert at church, and Indiana University Alumni 
event.  He stated the climate summit was fully co-planned and co-run by 
students, bringing the student climate groups of Palo Alto schools and 
Stanford together, and had success of various collaborations that were the 
theme of the summit.  There was a series of local cities represented and 20+ 
cosponsors of primarily nonprofits involved in climate initiatives that had the 
opportunity to get to know each other and talk about how they are going to 
collaborate with each other.  The relationships with Senator Becker and Dr. 
Nouri were important.  He felt there would be opportunities for the City to be 
a model and potentially a recipient of federal promotion and grants on these 
efforts.  
 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:58 P.M. 
