CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 15 
Special Meeting 
 
September 19, 2022 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Cormack, Dubois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Present Virtually:  
None 
Absent: 
 
 
 
 
Public Comment 
Aram James commented on the Black Lives Matter lawsuit by members of 
the Palo Alto Police Department.  
Closed Session 
1. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY- EXISTING LITIGATION Subject: 
Charles Scrivner v. City of Palo Alto Santa Clara County Superior Court 
Case No. 18-CV-333834 (One Case, as Defendant) Authority: 
Government Code Section 54956.9(d)(1) 
2. 
CONFERENCE WITH CITY ATTORNEY- EXISTING LITIGATION Subject: 
Eric Figueroa, et al.  v. City of Palo Alto Santa Clara County Superior 
Court, Case No. 21 CV38374O Authority: Government Code Section 
54956.9(d)(1) 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Kou to go into Closed Session. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Council Member Tanaka arrived at 5:05 P.M. 
Council went into Closed Session at 5:07 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:31 P.M. 
Mayor Burt indicated there were no announcements for the public.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor Burt reported Item 3 was pulled from consideration by Staff and was 
to be rescheduled. 
Consent Calendar 
Staff pulled Agenda Item 3 from consideration prior to the meeting.  
3. 
Adopt a Resolution Authorizing the City Manager to Purchase a Portion 
of the City’s Natural Gas Requirements From Certain Prequalified 
Natural Gas Suppliers Under Specified Terms and Conditions for 
Delivery During Calendar Years 2023 Through 2032, Inclusive, With a 
$300 Million Maximum Aggregate Transaction Limit  
Item Removed from Consideration 
4. 
Adoption of a Resolution 10071 to Appoint Adriane D. McCoy of 
Baker Tilly US, LLP as Interim City Auditor Through January 31, 2023 
Public Comment: None. 
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
DuBois to approve Agenda Item Number 3. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
Mayor Burt reiterated agenda changes, that Item 3 had been removed and 
previous to the meeting, Item 5 had been removed from the agenda and 
rescheduled for October 17, 2022, 5 P.M. 
Adrian McCoy Interim City Auditor voiced her pleasure in being chosen for 
Interim City Auditor. She spoke of the role of the City Auditor. She provided 
examples of her experience. She welcomed future discussion of visions, 
initiatives, and concerns for the wellbeing of the City, so the community 
could collaboratively be served.  
Public Comment 
Aram James directed comments to the City Attorney regarding denial of his 
request on September 12 for footage of a canine attack on October 10, 
2021. He spoke of SB1421 and his opinion of his entitlement to the police 
videos an addressed transparency. He wanted canines banned.  
 
Winter Dellenbach called attention to Item 11 on the September 27 Council 
agenda and assumed a Council meeting with the IPA had been agenized. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
She asked Council Members to review the Use-of-Force Report submitted by 
the PAPD.  
 
Matt Schlegel encouraged all to attend the climate rally Friday at 5 P.M. in 
King Plaza and expressed his opinion of the need to immediately stop using 
fossil fuels. He encouraged passing of the S/CAP Goals and Key Metrics 
framework and moving forward with the heat pump water heater program.  
City Manager Comments 
 
 
City Manager Ed Shikada participated remotely. The City Clerk presented 
slides. City Manager Shikada provided updates of pandemic-related news 
and weather-related events staff responded to and preparedness of the 
community for future events. He outlined upcoming events at the Art Center 
and the One Water Plan workshop at City Hall. The Council meeting Monday 
of next week had been moved to Tuesday and would focus on sustainability 
and climate action plan goals and key actions and would be the first of a 
two-part discussion by the City Council. S/CAP update Part 2 would take 
place Monday, October 3, as well as Council’s discussion of positions they 
would like to take on items on the November 2022 ballot. The October 10 
City Council meeting would be cancelled. October 17 would be the 
prescreening in reference to the Creekside Inn proposed development that 
was deferred from today’s agenda. Upcoming items were to be the Green 
Building, NVCAP revised preferred alternative, and Parklets. A date was to be 
scheduled for a discussion between the City Council and the IPA.  
Study Session  
5. 3400 El CAMINO REAL [22PLN-00227]: Request for Prescreening of 
the Applicant's Proposal to Rezone the Subject Site From Various 
Zoning Districts to Planned Housing Zone (PHZ) to Allow Construction 
of 382 Residential Rental Units (44 studios, 243 one-bedroom, 86 two-
bedroom and 9 three-bedroom units) in two Buildings. Environmental 
Assessment: Not a Project. Zoning District: CS, CS(H), RM-20 (Service 
Commercial, Hotel, Multi-Family Residential). (7:15 – 8:15 PM)   
ACTION: Item Continued to October 17th, 2022. 
 
6. Joint Study Session With City Council and Utilities Advisory 
Commission (UAC) Regarding Fiber-to-the-Premise Efforts  
Director of Utilities Dean Batchelor stated the background, survey results, 
modeling, risk mitigation, the financial options, and organizational structure 
would be addressed. The marketing analysis and estimated costs, key 
values, and some of the risks involved in moving forward with owning a 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
Fiber-to-the-Premise (FTTP) network, and the three different models of 
organizational structure and costs of the models were items to be 
considered.   
UAC 
Subcommittee 
Member 
Phil 
Metz 
presented 
slides. 
The 
UAC 
Subcommittee on Fiber recommended the CPAU proceed forward evaluating 
the plans to offer fiber-based broadband services but had specific 
recommendations addressing inherent risks in the City developing an 
internet service provider. He touched on key findings highlighting the 
competitiveness of this business. The benefits were to be addressed by 
others, 
but 
he 
welcomed 
questions. 
He 
addressed 
four 
risks. 
Recommendations, risks, and concerns would be addressed during open 
discussion. 
Magellan Advisors President John Honker presented slides and gave an 
update on the project and shared some findings. He rehashed what had 
previously been approved by the Council. He spoke of their survey results, 
the results of a deposit program, estimated take rates, the value proposition 
of City-owned fiber, examples of different business models to consider, and 
business risks and mitigation of the business plan.  
UAC Chair Lauren Segal wanted to ensure Council was aware of a cover 
letter and memo provided by the Subcommittee that they had not had an 
opportunity to vet and was hopeful the issues would be addressed tonight.  
Mayor Burt stated tonight was a study session and actions would be at a 
future meeting.   
Council Member Filseth asked how much of the City was not covered by 
Comcast. A stat showed Comcast market share in Palo Alto was 70% and 
AT&T 25% and inquired what that was for. There had been conversations 
that Comcast and AT&T would not be able to easily serve parts of the City 
with fiber. He inquired how much of the City was covered by them and if we 
would be able to serve that part of the City with fiber. He questioned if the 
analysis asked people if they would subscribe to a gigabit at $89.99 or if 
they would switch from Comcast to Palo Alto at a gigabit at $89.99. He 
asked what Atherton fiber’s take rate was in and in Menlo Park.  
President Honker noted the vast majority of the City was covered by 
Comcast and most were cable-based services to homes and more fiber to 
businesses. Broadband Comcast covered the whole City. The Comcast and 
AT&T market share was for fiber or cable internet services. The survey data 
showed 25% to 30% of the City was covered by AT&T offering fiber services 
to homes and most of those areas were aerial, a less expensive way to 
provide fiber than under streets and most providers would go where it was 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
cheapest to build. Palo Alto could build to about 70% of the community that 
did not have fiber. The City could build 100%, but what had not been built 
by AT&T was about 30%. The study focused on the switching aspect of 
service and what would be the preferred provider if households did not have 
service. He did not know Atherton fiber’s take rate in Atherton and Menlo 
Park.  
Council Member DuBois inquired how Palo Alto’s business plan, financing, 
and engineering design compared to other cities. He wanted to understand 
the construction financial assumptions in terms of trenching and what Palo 
Alto Utilities would allow. He asked if the business case included the cost to 
replace power poles, how many broadband providers had unionized labor, 
and if there were opportunities for smart water and smart gas and if we 
would expand beyond electricity at some point. 
President Honker stated demand was working in Palo Alto’s favor and cost 
was working against Palo Alto. The financial plan was sustainable but costs 
were much higher than what they had seen in other communities. The 
overall construction assumption was the fiber network would follow the 
electric network. They were conservative on the construction cost and did 
not utilize microtrenching but utilized 90% directional drilling on the 
underground. They estimated make-ready costs, prepping existing poles for 
new fiber or replacing poles if the poles failed new fiber installation, and 
under 1,000 poles would need to be replaced, and the cost would be shared 
across users. Broadband providers were typically unionized.  
Director Batchelor commented part of the cost would be expanding beyond 
electricity. There would be cost from an AMI portion because they were AMI 
in water and gas, so they paid their share now. 
Council Member Stone asked what extent was the disparity of internet 
connection amongst various demographics in the City and the aesthetics of 
aerial construction. 
President Honker stated Palo Alto’s disparity of internet connection was 
smaller than most communities. As for aesthetics, they would be adding a 
relatively small cable where there were already other attachers to existing 
utility poles, and a huge amount of visual disturbance would not be added.  
Council Member Stone would like images of cable additions that had been 
done in other communities. He addressed a significant price increase for 
fiber backbone and FTTP in the last year and asked if it was anticipated costs 
would continue to rise at similar rates or if we might see a drop. He inquired 
why there was concern of difficulty accessing the FTTP network for 
multidwelling units; if the take rate at 27% to 30% for revenues exceeding 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
expenses would include expenses of the start-up fee of over $100 million or 
if it covered just ongoing program costs; and if the City had exploratory 
conversations with neighboring cities or the county see if there was an 
interest in a JPA. 
President Honker expressed they were starting to see a bit of flattening on 
materials and some of the labor. There may be small price increases but 
nothing compared to 2021 to 2022. Prices were unlikely to drop in the near 
term. Regarding MDUs, he spoke of right of entry agreements with property 
owners and explained it was less expensive to serve MDUs if they were 20 to 
50 units versus single-family homes. MDUs require more frontend work but 
provide better revenue streams and typically lower overall cost per 
subscriber. He explained the take rate being all inclusive. He did not believe 
there had been conversations with neighboring cities or the county regarding 
a JPA. 
Council Member Cormack asked if regarding the take rate they extrapolated 
straight from the people who responded or if the number was adjusted in 
any way, how the choice of the business model increased or decreased the 
risks identified, if we had to allow other providers to access the fiber, and 
how worried we should be 5G would supplant this. 
President Honker stated the take rate numbers were adjusted and explained 
why the business models reduced identified risks. Regarding other providers 
being allowed access to the fiber, there were requirements to share certain 
resources, and he provided examples. He provided examples of 5G being a 
threat and an opportunity.  
UAC Chair Segal asked if they had looked at starting with underground 
versus overhead lines for various reasons and if one of the options was 
mostly outsourced if they thought about entering into joint venture with one 
of the current providers and relying on their expertise on the service side. 
She had spoken with community members who did not participate in the 
survey, and a question was whether there were opportunity costs if the 
utility focused on fiber, if there was risk of getting a bond for electrical 
updates or another large City project. She questioned if underground was 
laid could it be combined with other projects.  
President Honker remarked it was a worthwhile strategy to try to raise take 
rates in underground areas, and it made perfect sense if we could get to 
higher take rates there and had captive markets. It could be started in the 
areas where it made sense and was an analysis that could happen. He gave 
examples of JVs in other communities with more of a public/private 
partnership option being utilized to provide some of those services.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
Director Batchelor stated they would cover the utility focuses on fiber and 
bonds in the second half of their study. He commented regarding 
underground versus overhead lines that the underground portion was 60% 
to 70% of the cost, so starting with the underground portion made sense for 
gaining, but 30% to 35% would be cost for aerial and the rest the 
underground. Part of the strategy they had discussed was looking at the 
aerial portion first. In reference to combining laying underground combined 
with other projects, the easiest was to look at was underground electric at 
the same time but explained why that would be difficult. They could look at 
combining some of the fiber in the water/gas/wastewater side.  
Vice Mayor Kou asked what was the staffing model of similarly sized cities 
that had been successful. She was concerned about phasing the build in and 
the cost going up in future years, whereas doing everything at one time 
would keep the cost at what had been quoted.  
President Honker replied staffing depends on the city. Most municipal utilities 
staff themselves with their own employees for core services. He provided 
examples of what may be outsourced. There would be more cost in phasing 
and less impact in inflation over a shorter term build.  
UAC Commissioner Lisa Forssell inquired of the take rates in other cities that 
already had incumbents offering fiber and/or other forms of broadband 
service and insight as to what drove the uptake. 
President Honker commented it was typically 35% and 50% over a 5-year 
period for most cities similar to Palo Alto’s offering. He clarified what drove 
the uptake being the right value proposition and better service.  
Commissioner Forssell asked if we could offer white-glove service even if 
outsourced and if customer service involved in-home wi-fi access points; if 
the relationship between the City of Palo Alto and an outsourced IP would be 
similar to the relationship between AT&T and Sonic; and if undergrounding 
would involve trenching on the customer’s property and who would bear that 
cost. 
President Honker answered that all providers had to try to offer service and 
noted where focus should be placed. In-home wi-fi points were set up and 
was a full-home experience and the utility managing all the services in the 
home. He explained outsourcing would be thought of more as a strategic 
vendor. Undergrounding would typically involve trenching on the customer’s 
property, and the City would bear the cost.  
Mayor Burt inquired if take rate assumption ranges were broken down as to 
how many competitors there would be; asked the range of cost savings from 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
microtrenching and restoration costs of conventional versus microtrenching 
and if deposit results were an indicator of take rates. 
President Honker provided examples of take rate assumption ranges 
depending on the community. A study would need to be done on Palo Alto’s 
roadways regarding microtrenching cost savings, and restoration costs may 
be higher or lower depending on the dynamics of the roadway beds that 
would need restoration after the microtrenching. Overall long-term O&M of 
microtrenching needed to be looked at. Deposit results were an indicator of 
take rates.  
Magellan Advisors Project Manager Broadband Implementation Chris Street 
explained the cost of microtrenching depended on conditions of the ground 
and savings could be as much as 50%.  
Mayor Burt asked if there was existing undergrounding for overlap that 
would provide lower costs and higher take rates in the beginning and the 
basis of offering superior reliability than existing providers. 
Director Batchelor indicated there were areas for advantages with 
undergrounding. There was opportunity for maximizing reliability in building 
a network from scratch. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired as to the percentage of Palo Alto 
households compared to neighboring communities getting a gigabit or 
higher; the percentage of households with a gigabit and higher speed 
compared to cities that had done open access or municipal; was Palo Alto 
behind in terms of availability of gigabit ethernet; and how does a city 
provider effect the percentage of people receiving such service. 
President Batchelor had not looked specifically at the speeds of other 
communities. Most other communities that had built out already had another 
provider providing gigabit services. Palo Alto was not behind other 
communities in terms of gigabit ethernet. The net effect of the City providing 
services would be lower prices for everyone. 
Council Member Tanka questioned if it was really lower prices because of the 
money cities are putting into programs, staff time, etc., and commented the 
total cost needed to be looked at, not just what the consumers pay. He was 
worried about the City being too late in doing this and if the City could move 
fast enough and differentiate enough in the market to have a big effect and 
if we should partner and outsource and provide incentives for existing 
providers to create more competition versus the City trying to compete.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
President Batchelor explained it was a triple net, that revenues from the 
consumer were paying all the cost for the service to finance, operate, and 
manage. All of a city’s cost needed to go into the price of the service. 
Ninety-five percent of existing providers were offering promotional prices.  
Public Comment: 
Jeff Hoel had sent a list of questions and was happy the questions the 
Council asked considered whether to go forward with this.  
 
Aram James opined this was a speculative proposition. He was concerned 
about outsourcing and wages. He questioned if the City should be putting 
money into a service that was already provided when other services are 
needed.  
 
Hamilton Hitchings commented on those already providing service to Palo 
Alto. He questioned Magellan’s estimates of take rates, conversion rates, 
financial estimates, and existing competitors’ customers. He thought it was 
important to understand what percentage of homes would be offered fiber 
by competitors.  
 
Herb Borock had sent a letter with questions and had more questions after 
reading the report in more detail. He voiced his preferences for services, 
addressed labor negotiations, and requested clearer spreadsheets regarding 
capital forecasting versus the operating budget.  
 
Bob Smith spoke of the risks of broadband and the priority of the City’s 
electrical grid. 
 
Andy Poggio referenced concerns of fiber technology obsolesce. He felt 
underground fiber may not be an opportunity. He mentioned future 
electrification needs. 
Commissioner Loren Smith discussed Slide 8 and availability, declared dark 
fiber was necessary, mentioned bundling and the survey results, and 
addressed timing. Rollout of fiber was a revenue bond and was not related to 
fixing or upgrading the electrical utility grid other than the physical work. He 
remarked on payment and improvement of the fiber fund. He referenced 
COVID and reliable fiber being necessary. 
[The Council took a 15-minute break] 
Mayor Burt noted the next segment would be a Council session covering 
financial sensitivity analysis, financing options, organizational structures, and 
additional discussion. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
President Honker explained Magellan’s work. He provided a presentation 
focused on financial aspects of costs, funding, the financial plan of different 
business models, and sensitivity analysis of key variables and financial 
performance at varied take rates. As final financial plans were worked 
through over the coming weeks, there would be more financial and 
sensitivity analyses provided. Four financing options were furnished.  
Mayor Burt asked that questions be focused on the financial aspects. 
Council Member Cormack inquired regarding Slide 22 as to the value of the 
funds, how the funds should be thought of, and what other municipalities did 
with excess funds. The next time this was looked at, she wanted an 
understanding of the expected uses for the funds and why. She voiced 
concerns about competition and asked how incumbents would compete if 
this business model was implemented and the financial risks that might 
occur.  
President Honker replied Slide 22 was a net of replacement, typically called a 
free cash flow schedule. Excess funds were typically reinvested into the 
network for expansion, some general fund transfers if allowed, and 
repayment of loans to the electric utility for other municipal utilities. 
Regarding incumbents competing, typically those would be classified as prior 
to construction or deployment and post. Competition would continue to try 
to lock customers into long-term contracts, lower rates, etc. He gave 
examples of competition trying to slow projects. They had seen business 
risks, leadership challenges, and existing delays related to city policies in 
terms of permitting. 
Council Member Stone asked if the City Attorney’s office foresaw problems 
transferring excess funds to the general fund. He inquired of Magellan if the 
take rate analysis considered the growth the City was anticipating in housing 
over the next 10 years and if there had been a discrepancy in polling of 
customer satisfaction within MHUs compared to single-family homes.  
City Attorney Molly Stump indicated the law was different than the gas and 
electric transfer and was evolving. They would look at it and work closely 
with staff over time.  
President Honker replied the MSA take rate had been utilized for the local 
MSA, and the growth in housing was factored in, effectively factoring in the 
take rate. There was no specific trend in multifamily versus single family 
polling of customer satisfaction in Palo Alto and had varied case by case 
regarding other cities.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
Mayor Burt inquired as to how much cash has gone into the current fiber 
fund per year in the last three years or so; regarding the bond, if revenues 
fall short, would it be paid by the general fund or utility fund; if profits would 
stay in the electric fund if the electric fund backs the bond and if there was 
profit who would get it; if dollars in the fiber fund would to be used for fiber 
purposes only; if the cost of service would drastically drop if there were 
three versus one or two providers; and if AT&T accelerated expanding 
service how it would affect Palo Alto’s take rate and break-even point and 
the effects if they did not accelerate and continued at their current rate of 
expanding service.  
Director Batchelor stated about $2 to $2.5 million had gone into the fiber 
fund per year. Regarding revenues falling short, if the electric fund was used 
to back the project, he understood funds would come out of the electric fund 
but if used from a City perspective, it would come out of the general fund.  
Administrative Services Director Kiely Nose clarified if the electric fund 
benefitted from the investment from the funds issued from the bond, pieces 
of any liability could be allocated to the electric fund, but unless electric rate 
payors were benefitting from the investment, the general fund would be the 
end stop if there was a default.  
City Attorney Stump needed to research to answer some of the questions 
posed. The area of the law was changing through judicial decisions and 
potentially new legislation, so the amount of flexibility the City currently had 
versus the time period for this activity may change. They were continuing to 
look at whether dollars in the fiber fund were to be used for fiber purposes 
only due to a Court of Appeal decision raising questions. 
President Honker commented there had not been a drastic price drop in 
other communities going from two to three providers. If AT&T accelerated 
their deployment, it would make it more difficult for Palo Alto to pursue that 
take rate. As for as AT&T’s current rate of expanding service, he guessed 
they had been increasing their densification of fiber across Palo Alto for five 
to seven years and was the typical timeline for most big providers increasing 
their fiber infrastructure. 
Council Member Dubois commented on why fiber to the home. There was 
positive feedback from the survey that should be taken into consideration. 
The financing side was compelling. Focus should be on de-risking the 
business plan and moving as fast as possible. In terms of business structure, 
thought should be given to having this nascent business and letting it 
flourish, and loading a fiber utility with government processes and overhead 
should be avoided. He leaned toward the outsourced model and hiring key 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
managers internally. As for phasing, we should move quickly and get as 
many subscribers as possible. Hearing that 70% of the cost were in 
underground districts gave him pause as to where to start and where to go, 
and he was interested in getting that iteration of the business model. With 
respect to competition, a marketing and business plan needed to be 
executed. He spoke of innovation being an opportunity. A slow rollout was 
the highest risk.  
Council member Kou asked if the fiber enterprise fund was restricted to the 
dark fiber.  
President Honker stated the fiber enterprise fund was not restricted to the 
dark fiber and could be used for FTTP.  
Council Member Filseth voiced that architectural advantages starting from 
scratch was intriguing. The cash flow looked great but was a high fixed cost 
business. The survey data raised concerns regarding the take rate. He spoke 
of the complications of the value proposition, competition impacting 
financials, and the go-to-market plan being important.  
Mayor Burt asked what was the buildout time frame and if the $2 to $2.5 
million from the dark fiber fund was built into the cash flow; regarding the 
backbone expansion, aside from the FTTP, would we need to soon do electric 
utility AMI and if it was a five-year buildout what would be done to meet that 
need in the next year or two; in the next five years, while rolling this out, 
how well would the need be met to accommodate a full rollout of AMI before 
a rollout of this system; would building out the backbone create other 
opportunities to expand business and earnings from the dark fiber network; 
if there was a sense of how many more businesses and customers would be 
attracted as the backbone rollout was done; and if there would be a way to 
capture the reliability premium. 
President Honker responded that the buildout time frame would be about 
five years. The net cash flows from the existing fiber business were built into 
the numbers. To accommodate a full rollout of AMI before a rollout of this 
system, the fiber for AMI could be prioritized with the FTTP rollout, so it 
would happen coincident with those areas. There would be opportunity of 
expanding business and earnings from the dark fiber network as the 
backbone was built out. They could get numbers on how many more 
businesses would have access as the backbone rollout was done. The new 
fiber backbone would go through areas that did not have fiber, and those 
business would all be targets for new service. They could put that on the 
agenda to quantify. They could capture that the premium for the reliability 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
would not create a cost in service for the customer and should drive take 
rates. 
Director Batchelor noted they used the existing fiber backbone for some 
water and gas meters.  
Council Member Cormack expressed she was still waiting for the answer to 
the question of the problem we were trying to solve. She felt the value 
proposition was not written in an easy-to-understand way that would make 
people comfortable making a multimillion dollar decision. The fundamental 
questions were should Palo Alto have fiber everywhere in 5, 10, or 15 years, 
and should it be operated by the government. If the question of how many 
people will have AT&T in three years cannot be answered, maybe the 
responsibility should be taken on ourselves. If we knew an existing 
competitor was going to provide reliable fiber, she was not sure the risk 
should be taken. She questioned if doing this would in any way displace the 
crucial work of getting gas out of the City. She asked in relation to an exit 
strategy could infrastructure be sold to competitors.  
Director Batchelor expressed this would not displace the work of getting gas 
out of the City. Other than from a new design standpoint if a joint trench 
would be done with a gas or water project, there would be no shared 
resources between fiber and gas.  
President Honker explained possibilities of an exit strategy.  
Council Member Stone believed a compelling case had been made for the 
take rate. He was concerned the City would be taking on responsibilities and 
strategies the City was not experienced in. He did not know how people 
would react to the switch, and it was a big stake. In reference to Staff’s 
report of Palo Alto possibly becoming the third largest ISP in the market, he 
believed less competition would lead to less innovation and fewer incentives. 
He wondered what was government’s role and should we stay out of the 
market, thereby having a better situation providing private actors competing 
for market share. He viewed the risk of connection to tenants in multi-using 
housing a flaw and wanted to see the Staff report further developed 
regarding risk mitigators. It was not sufficient to say those growing 
households may not be reached, and he wanted to see a plan building that 
in. He provided reasons for his preference of in-house versus outsourced 
service but also addressed challenges. This could help address equity issues.  
Council Member Tanaka remarked this could not be compared to our power, 
water, etc., because those were monopolies. Presenting this service to be 
used as a patriotic duty could not be relied on for business. He discussed 
Palo Alto having better rates than PG&E but the capital that went in needed 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
to be considered and not just the rates people would be paying. The service 
proposed was not compelling, and may be less compelling in future years 
and indicated more than a gigabit would be needed. Reliability would be a 
hard sell. We should encourage start-ups to provide service and provide 
incentives for competitors. Being an ISP was customer service, and the City 
did not excel in customer service. He addressed power outages and did not 
think Palo Alto had the brand of being reliable. We should come up with a 
compelling and less expensive service offering or encourage massive 
competition, which would yield better results.  
Council Member Kou requested that when Magellan returned to include some 
modeling of municipalities’ take rates, their implementation, and challenges 
they had.  
President Honker indicated he should be able do that.  
Council Member DuBois asked if over five years they recommended offering 
a 10 gigabit service and what would be the ability to offer compelling 
services. He wanted the ability over time to upgrade.  
President Honker replied 2, 5 and/or 10 gigabit services could be offered 
from day one.  
Council Member Filseth questioned if we could make money at 2.5 gigs at 
$40 a month and if fixed cost per resident would be significantly lower than 
competitors because we would be starting from scratch. Aggressive pricing 
may be needed to gain customers. A clear understanding was needed of who 
the customers would be, why would they buy it, the customer acquisition 
cost, what would they pay, and why pick us instead of a competitor, and 
how far could we lower prices and not go broke.  
President Honker stated there would be limits and cost of increasing speeds 
would be marginal. The goal would be to provide as much speed as possible 
with the limits of the network at the lowest cost possible. To some degree, 
fixed cost per resident could be lower. He explained leaving cushion for 
potential price reductions. Pricing should be set competitively to achieve 
take rates slightly lower than competition but not going too low. That cash 
may be needed for future business issues. He agreed that aggressive pricing 
may be needed to gain customers. Minimal fixed cost per customer to pay 
back the debt service and cover costs was always needed.  
Council Member Tanaka was concerned we would be chasing something that 
would be hard to beat. Internet service also included branding. We needed 
to figure out our competitive advantage, which he suggested could be 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 15 
Sp. City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes September 19, 2022 
latency. If we could not get a clear win, we should not do this because there 
would be too much risk.  
Mayor Burt summarized additional information was needed regarding a 
better sense of the construction costs for microtrenching, which seemed 
significant; the potential of combining the fiber laying with other utilities we 
would be putting down rather than vice versa; an estimation of additional 
revenue opportunities from the backbone expansion from the dark fiber; a 
better understanding of the general fund transfers; and projections of the 
impact of AT&T’s expansion at their current rate based on five years from 
now and how competitive they would be to us at that time versus if we 
rolled out today on the current take-up and how it would affect us if they 
chose to accelerate their rollout.  
Council Member Dubois asked if a lit fiber services to businesses was in the 
business plan.  
President Honker voiced that lit fiber transport services and anything the 
business community would need in terms of telecommunications was in the 
business plan. 
Mayor Burt inquired what the next steps would be in returning to Council 
with a significant portion of their questions, whether it would be an action 
item or a study session leading to an action item. 
Director Batchelor commented they plan to compile a new report to include 
all the Council’s questions and concerns and bring it back as an action item 
on November 26.  
ACTON: No action taken, direction provided 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack furnished an update on water supply from the 
BAWSCA meeting last week. She provided slides in reference to the Fire 
Department wildfire training and the Community Services Department Art 
Center.  
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:30 P.M. 
