CITY COUNCIL
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 37
Special Meeting
April 4, 2022
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in virtual
teleconference [ in person] at 5:00 P.M. 
Participating Remotely [ chambers]: Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, 
Stone, Tanaka
Absent:  
Closed Session
1. 
CONFERENCE
WITH
LABOR
NEGOTIATORS
City
Designated
Representatives: City Manager and his Designees Pursuant to Merit
System Rules and Regulations ( Ed Shikada, Kiely Nose, Rumi Portillo, 
Sandra Blanch, Nicholas Raisch, Molly Stump, and Terence Howzell) 
Employee
Organization: Employee
Organization: Service Employees
International
Union, ( SEIU) Local
521, Utilities
Management
and
Professional Association of Palo Alto ( UMPAPA) Palo Alto Peace Officers’ 
Association ( PAPOA), Palo Alto Police Management Association ( PMA), 
International Association of Fire Fighters ( IAFF) local 1319, Palo Alto
Fire
Chiefs
Association (
FCA), 
Management
and
Professional
Employees ( MGMT); Authority: Government
Code Section 54957.6
a); Authority: Government Code Section 54957.6 (a). 
MOTION:  
Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Council Member
Cormack to go into Closed Session.  Kou Arrived 6-0
MOTION PASSED/ FAILED:  6-0, Tanaka Absent
Council went into Closed Session at 5:03 P.M. 
Council returned from Closed Session at 6:15 P.M. 
Mayor Burt made no announcements for the public.   
Special Orders of the Day
2. 
Adoption of Resolution for Gabriel Mora Upon His Retirement. 
Vice Mayor Kou read the proclamation into the record. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Officer Gabirel Mora stated it was a pleasure and privilege to work for the
City of Palo Alto for 24-years. 
Police Chief Robert Jonsen remarked that Officer Mora is a testament to
public service.  
Public Comment
Sharon Lee-Nakayama commended Officer Mora for his years of service.  
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Kou moved, seconded by Council Member Cormack to
adopt the Resolution. 
Vice Mayor Kou commented Officer Mora has been a steady face within the
community and has shown dedication to the community and the City. 
Mayor Burt stated Officer Mora was a prime example of a public servant and
thanked him for his service. 
Council Member Stone acknowledged that Officer Mora’s job often did not
receive the credit it deserved and thanked him for his service to the City. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
3. 
Proclamation
Honoring
National
Public
Safety
Telecommunicator' s
Week - April 10-16, 2022. 
Council Member Cormack read the proclamation into the record. 
NO ACTION TAKEN
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions
None.  
Public Comment
Katie Rveff spoke on behalf of the 350 Palo Alto Climate Team and the Gunn
Green Team.  She invited the Council to attend the March and Rally for Earth
event.  The event was to be held on Earth Day, April 22, 2022, at King
Plaza.  The event will unify, celebrate and encourage collaboration to create
sustainable actions.  
Giulianna Pendelton, Santa Clara County Audubon Society, stated feral cats
are one of the prime causes of mortality for birds and a large threat to local
bird populations. A recent study highlighted that feeding stations for feral
cats did not reduce hunting behaviors and the feeding stations made cats
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
less territorial. The study recommended a buffer of 750-feet from the edge
of habitat is needed to reduce the morality of wildlife from roaming cats. 
Rebecca Eisenberg encouraged the Council to take a stand on the use of
violence
to
resolve
differences.  
She
recommended
Council
to
place
themselves in the situation and strongly assess the impacts their decision
will have on the community.  
Sharon
Lee- Nakayama
stated
Altaire
Walk
had
recommended
crime
prevention be a 2022 priority for the Council.  Since that communication, 
thefts have gone down, police patrols have increased in the area and
meetings were being held to understand residents’ concerns.  On April 22, 
2022, a movie night will be held with Altaire residents and the Palo Alto
Police
Department (
PAPD) 
to
personalize
the
police
officers
to
the
community. 
Aram James stated the hiring process for the next Chief of Police has lacked
transparency.  He strongly urged Council to demand a transparent process
from City Manager Shikada concerning hiring the next Chief of Police.  
Consent Calendar
Public Comment
Rebecca Eisenberg stated for Item Number Six, the Council should assess
businesses and if the business cannot pay their assessment.  Then they can
go through the waiver process.  Regarding Item Number Seven, she stated
the audit plan was flawed and did not address
concerns
made by the
community. Regarding Item Number 10, she did not support spending
113,500 on surveys that were flawed and misleading.  The City should
examine nearby jurisdictions
instead of doing surveys. Regarding Item
Number Nine, the item appeared to lower the City’s renewable gas supply.  
Shani Kleinhaus spoke on behalf of herself, the Santa Clara County Audubon
Society and as Co-Chair of the Wildlife Committee of the Loma Prieta
Chapter
of the Sierra
Club.  
Regarding
Item
12, she appreciated
the
extension of the contract with Pets In Need as long as the prohibition of
releasing feral cats into the community was upheld. 
Aram James stated the surveys in Item Number 10 were a waste of public
funding.  He asked why the City was extending the contract with Pets In
Need when several employees were facing criminal charges.  He wanted to
see the City hire union employees to run the shelter. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Council Member DuBois registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 8. 
Council Member Kou registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 5. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Items 5, 6, 10
MOTION:  Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member
Filseth to approve Agenda Item Numbers 4-14. 
4. 
Approve Minutes from the March 11, 2022 City Council Meeting, March
14, 2022 City Council Meeting, and the March 21, 2022 City Council
Meeting. 
5. 
Utilities Advisory Commission and Staff Recommend the City Council
Approve
Two
Resolutions: 
1) Resolution
10024
Approving
an
Amendment to the Amended and Restated Water Supply Agreement
Between
the
City
and
County
of
San
Francisco
and
Wholesale
Customers in Alameda County, San Mateo County, and Santa Clara
County and Authorizing the City Manager to Execute the Amended
Agreement; 
and
2) Resolution
10025
Approving
a
Minimum
Purchase Transfer from the City of Mountain View to the City of East
Palo Alto. 
6. 
Approve Finance Committee
Recommendation
for
FY 2023 to ( a) 
Return to the Customary Pre-Pandemic Business Registry Certificate
Requirement
and Fee, and ( b) Pause for One Year the Downtown
Business Improvement District Assessment Program. 
7. 
Approve, as Recommended by Policy and Services Committee, the
FY2022/ 2023 Risk Assessment & Audit Plan Reports. 
8. 
Adoption of Resolution 10026 Authorizing Use of Teleconferencing
for Council Meetings During Covid-19 State of Emergency. 
9. 
Approval of Amendment Number 2 to the Power Purchase Agreement
for Landfill Gas-Generated Electricity With Ameresco Keller Canyon
LLC., Reducing
the
Facility's Output
in
Exchange
for
an
Annual
250,000 Administrative Payment to the City. 
10. 
Approval
of Contract
Amendment
Number 1 to Contract
Number
S22183587
with Fairbanks, Maslin, Maullin, Metz, and
Associates
FM3) in the Amount of $28,500 for One Additional Poll ( Three Polls, 
Total) for the Potential November 2022 Ballot Measure( s) for a Total
Not to Exceed Amount of $113,500 and Approve a Budget Amendment
in the General Fund. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
11. 
Adoption
of
Resolution
10027
Authorizing
the
Submittal
of
a
Financial
Assistance
Application
to
the
United
States
Bureau
of
Reclamation for the WaterSMART: Title XVI Water Reclamation
and
Reuse Project. 
12. 
Approval of Pets in Need's Amended Termination Notice to Extend
Termination Date Six Months for Continued Animal Shelter Operations. 
13. 
Adoption of Resolution 10028 Amending Public Hearing: Objections
to Weed Abatement and Adoption of Resolution 10029 Ordering
Weed Nuisance Abated to Correct an Administrative Error. 
14. 
Approval of Construction Contract Number C22181213 with Stronger
Building Services in the Amount of $ 179,500 for the Mitchell Park
Library Roof and Gutter Repair Project; Authorize the City Manager or
their Designee to Negotiate and Execute one or more Change Orders
for Related Additional but Unforeseen Work Not to Exceed $ 17,950; 
and Approval of a Budget Amendment for the Roofing Replacement
Capital Project ( PF- 00006) in the Capital Improvement Fund. 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING
MOTION TO APPROVE item 7, 9, 11-14: APPROVED 7-0
MOTION TO APPROVE Item 5: Approved 5-2, Kou, Tanaka No
MOTION TO APPROVE Item 6, 10: Approved 6-1, Tanaka No
Council Member DuBois announced he could not make the findings that the
City was still under a State of Emergency. 
Vice Mayor Kou liked having discussions about amendments to the contracts.  
Council Member Tanaka echoed Vice Mayor Kou’s comment regarding Item
Number Five. Regarding Item Number Six, many businesses
were still
suffering and he did not support Item A but agreed with Item B.  Regarding
Item Number 10, he echoed the comments made by the public.  He wanted
to see the ballot presented to the public in plain English without polling
instead of engineering the language to reach more support. 
City Manager Comments
City Manager Ed Shikada reported the U.S Food and Drug Administration
FDA) approved a second booster for COVID-19.  Community members
should consult with their health care providers for more information.  The
City continued to provide COVID-19 testing at the Curative testing kiosk at
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Mitchell Park.  Also, Santa Clara County would be providing testing at the
Palo Alto Art Center on April 8, 2022 and then at the Cubberley Pavilion on
April 22, 2022.  Upcoming on April 6, 2022 was a virtual community meeting
to discuss the new Tree Ordinance.  On April 9, 2022, the State of the City
Address will be held at 11:00 a.m. at Mitchell Park Community Center.  The
month
of
April
was
Earth
month
and
many
events
were
happening
throughout the month to celebrate the Earth.  On April 11, 2022 the Council
will be holding an Earth Day study session and then be discussing height
transitions for the Objective Standards.    
Action Items
15. 
Review and Approval of Workplans Implementing
2022 City Council
Priorities. 
City Manager Ed Shikada stated the item was the next stage in how the City
will refine and improve the Council’s annual priorities.  The Council approved
the priorities on February 5, 2022.  Staff identified key major projects that
will assist in the advancement of each priority.  He encouraged the Council
not to do a deep dive into the projects, but provide confirmation that Staff
had identified the right set of projects.  
Assistant City Manager Kiley Nose remarked the proposed workplan for each
priority was to identify the work ahead while also helping Staff to track the
progress on each priority.  Staff identified 65 major projects with 13 falling
under the Economic Recovery and Transition ( ERT) priority, eight under the
Climate Change Protection and Adaptation ( CCPA) priority, 24 under Housing
for Social and Economic Balance ( HSEB) priority and 20 under Community
Health and Safety ( CHS). Of the 65 projects, 42 were to begin in the
January through June 2022 timeframe, 13 would begin in the July to
December timeframe and 10 of the projects did not yet have allocated
resources.  
Regarding the ERT workplan, the work built off the 2021
Community and Economic Recovery priority and included a cohesive vision
for the City’s commercial core.  
Regarding the workplan for CPPA, the
proposed projects reflected the continuation of the Council’s priority from
2021.  Regarding the HSEB workplan, the plan would continue the work set
by the Council in 2021 and reflected the next steps. For the CHS priority, the
workplan focused on the quality of life variables in the City, including crime, 
mental health, air quality, noise and sense of belonging.  Staff proposed six
neighborhood town hall meetings be held during the calendar year of 2022
to discuss neighborhood issues as well as advance the City Council' s high-
priority major projects.  She reminded the Council and the community that
there were major initiatives still underway that were not included in the
workplan list.  Staff recommended the Council review and approve the list of
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
major projects associated with the 2022 City Council Priorities and approve
the plan for neighborhood town hall meetings.  
Vice Mayor Kou inquired if the list of projects was the only projects Council
would be reviewing throughout the year.  
Ms. Nose
explained
the projects
are what Staff will focus their time
throughout the year on top of ongoing initiatives.  
Vice Mayor Kou understood if Council wanted to initiate a different project
then a Colleague’s Memo would be the appropriate mechanism to do that.  
Mr. Shikada confirmed if Council has an initiative unrelated to the priority
workplans then a Colleague’s Memo would be the appropriate mechanism.  If
the project fell within the priority workplans, then Council would have to
discuss prioritization within the workplan to accommodate it. 
Vice Mayor Kou remarked she was not supportive of being limited to a set of
projects. 
Council Member Stone asked if the town hall meetings will be hybrid. 
Meghan Horrigan- Taylor, Communications Officer, answered yes.  
Council Member Stone wanted more information regarding parking in lieu
downtown office parking ban as a strategy for affordable housing. 
Director of Development and Community Services Jonathan Lait explained
several years ago the City had created an opportunity for office development
to outcompete housing.  Later, that program was paused but the program
was not directly related to affordable housing.  
Public Comment
Bob Moss ( In person) was concerned about 340 Portage and its future.  The
structure was a historical structure and had a very significant history.  He
recommended the City talk to the landowner about preserving the building
and reusing the structure.  
Aram James agreed with Mr. Moss’s comments regarding 340 Portage.  He
strongly recommended preserving 20 percent of housing near 340 Portage
for African Americans with low and very-low incomes.  Regarding the five
police officer slots proposed in the workplan, he recommended those slots be
filled with Psychiatric Emergency Response Team ( PERT) members. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Rebecca Eisenberg remarked that 340 Portage was currently zoned for
residential
use and the City should not be negotiating
with the current
landowner about commercial uses.  She noted there was no commitment to
consider sustainability in the CCPA workplan or in any decisions made by
Council.  
Annette Glanckopf Ashton requested that Staff and the Council seriously
consider the points raised in the Palo Alto Neighborhoods ( PAN) letter about
town hall meetings. 
Council Member
Filseth asked if there was any significant
drawback to
having the town hall meetings agendized under the Brown Act. 
Ms. Horrigan-Taylor stated Staff was seeking direction from Council on how
to structure town hall meetings. 
Council Member Filseth preferred there not be a limited number of Council
Member participation.  He supported having the majority of projects under
the CCPA workplan be focused on electrification.  
Council Member Cormack appreciated the reminder of Staff’s regular and
ongoing work outside of the priorities.  Regarding ERT, she supported the
focus being on the commercial cores.  She aligned her comments regarding
the CCPA workplan with Council Member Filseth’s remarks.  Regarding the
HSEB workplan, she wanted to discuss the programs more in-depth at a
later time.  Regarding CHS, she acknowledged that the workplan addressed
many of the concerns highlighted by the community but stated there was a
lack of projects to address a sense of belonging.  She wanted to see Staff
initiate the neighborhood ambassador program Council Member Stone and
herself highlighted in their Colleague’s Memo.  She commented that the City
will have to learn through trial and error which process works best for town
hall meetings.  The start time of the town hall meetings should be set to a
later time and she predicted many Council Members will have conflicts if the
town halls are held on the third Thursday of each month.  She appreciated
the format of having all the workplans together. 
Council Member DuBois agreed that the format outlining the projects and
how they correlated to the priorities was a good layout.  He recommended
for the future, that Staff bringing forward the complete workplan with all the
projects happening within the City.  He was hopeful that soon the Council
will begin discussions about aesthetic standards for projects six and seven of
the ERT workplan.  He inquired what constraints come with project 10 of the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
HSEB workplan.  Regarding HSEB 19, he suggested retiring the Planned
Home Zone ( PHZ) instead of refining it. Regarding CHS project 8, he was
happy to see the Tree Ordinance moving forward.  Regarding CHS project
20, he wanted to see the City find the resources to begin work on Seismic
Standards.  In the past, town hall meetings went well with a limited agenda
and more of a question and answer meeting.  He supported having the town
hall meetings be held under the Brown Act so that all Council Members could
attend.  He suggested assigning two Council Members to be designated
speakers and he supported many of the recommendations expressed by PAN
in their letter.  He agreed a start time of 5:30 p.m. was too early and the
neighborhood should drive the agenda for town halls.  He cautioned holding
town hall meetings during September and October because of election
season to avoid the town halls becoming a political forum. 
Vice Mayor Kou agreed with Council Member DuBois’ s comments regarding
town
hall
meetings.  
She
recommended
Staff
evaluate
PAN’s
recommendations
and
work
with
the
neighborhoods
to
determine
the
groupings.  She requested Staff explain project 11 in the ERT workplan. 
Mr. Lait mentioned downtown has an in-lieu parking program but that
program does not exist on California Avenue.  
Staff had presented
a
subscription program for California Avenue where a property owner could
lease a parking space which mimicked an in-lieu parking program.  The goal
was to allow more flexibility for the change of land use on California Avenue
that was related to the available parking resources. 
Vice Mayor Kou stated the new California Avenue parking garage should be
providing enough parking.  
Mr. Lait explained because of the parking garage, the City can leverage
some of the parking spaces to allow for a transition of uses to increase
density. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if the program included the loss of on-street parking
from California Avenue being closed to vehicle traffic.  
Mr. Lait confirmed Staff will be evaluating all parking availability.  
Vice Mayor Kou appreciated that the Tree Ordinance will be coming to
Council before their summer break.  She believed the Tree Ordinance should
be listed in the CCPA workplan instead of the CHS workplan. She wanted to
see a project focused on groundwater protection be included in the CCPA
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
workplan.  Also, she wanted to see the 10-acres of the Baylands that was
separated
from
the
park
be
rededicated
back
to
open
space.  
She
acknowledged that airplane noise still greatly affected the community and
appreciated it being included in the workplan.  She wanted to see the Uplift
Local program come back to the Council.  Also, code enforcement should be
considered a high priority with a focus on building violations. She agreed the
format presented by Staff was very helpful and clear. 
Council
Member
Stone
suggested
that
Staff
incorporate
the
recommendations
made by PAN for town hall meetings.  The expectation
from Council and the community was to have town halls be true community
engagement.  The proposed 5:30 p.m. start time was not a reasonable and
feasible time for full participation. He supported Council Member DuBois’s
comment about not holding town halls in September and October.  Also, to
reevaluate
the neighborhood
groupings.  
He asked what legislation
was
passed that made the new Tree Ordinance out of compliance.  
Ms. Nose stated Staff would have to follow up on the answer. 
Mayor Burt appreciated the comprehensive format, but he requested to
update the timeframes where possible.  He recalled in 2015, the town halls
were neighborhood lead meetings and not City meetings.  Staff and Council
Members would engage in a dialog with the neighborhood.  He suggested
Staff reexamine
the approach
to the town halls and incorporate
PAN’s
recommendations.  
The
City
must
engage
multi-family
residents
and
encourage them to attend the town halls.  He agreed that 5:30 p.m. was too
early to start, 1 ½-hours was too short, there should be no town halls during
election months and a town hall should be held in early December.  He
recommended that the Vice Mayor and himself meet with PAN and refine the
plan further for town hall meetings. 
Ms. 
Horrigan- Taylor
stated
she
very
much
appreciated
PAN’s
recommendations.  She shared the City uses the NextDoor platform as a
way to communicate and connect with the community.  Staff will be refining
the neighborhood groupings as well as the number of town hall meetings
that should be held.  She noted if the town halls are under the Brown Act, all
Council Members would have to participate and she requested clarity from
Council on that point.  
Mayor Burt recommended Staff consider homeowner association leadership
as neighborhood groups and engage them in the process.  He understood if
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
the meetings falls under the Brown Act, only a majority of Council Members
would have to attend. 
City Attorney Molly Stump confirmed that is correct.  If a majority was not
present, the meeting could still be held but it would be considered a non-
meeting. 
MOTION:  
Council member DuBois moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to
accept the list of major projects associated with the 2022 City Council
Priorities and have the Mayor and Vice Mayor work with staff to refine the
town hall meeting program details and enable all Council to attend as
optional attendance.  
Council Member DuBois stated it made sense to allow all Council Members to
attend the town halls.  He strongly supported the recommendations made by
PAN and supported having the town halls extend into the year 2023. 
Ms.
Horrigan- Taylor
understood
from
the
discussion
that
Council
was
interested in holding a town hall in June, August, November and December.  
Mayor Burt agreed. 
Council Member DuBois understood the intention was if there was a majority
of Council Members in attendance then the town halls would be Brown Acted
and that the meetings would not be a required Council meeting. 
Mayor Burt concurred with Council Member DuBois. 
Council
Member
DuBois
recalled
Council
had held similar
meetings
in
previous years. 
Council Member Cormack requested that the town halls not be scheduled at
a time and date when Council Members have other responsibilities.  
Ms. Horrigan-Taylor confirmed Staff will work with the schedule.  
Council Member Cormack asked what Council’s opinion was on having
Council Members participating in their own neighborhood Town Hall.  
Ms. Horrigan-Taylor clarified the proposal was that two Council Members
would host each meeting.  If that was acceptable then Council Members
could sign up for different town halls.  
Council
Member
Cormack
recommended
Staff and the Council
consider
equity and fairness when the town halls are scheduled. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Ms. Horrigan-Taylor recalled there was a more formal town hall meeting held
in the Ventura neighborhood.  She understood though from the discussion
that the Council was more interested in having a less formal discussion. 
Mayor Burt believed that Ventura town hall was more of a coordinated plan
meeting. 
Vice Mayor Kou remarked there was an understanding that four town halls
will be held for the year 2022. 
Ms. Horrigan-Taylor confirmed that was correct. 
Vice Mayor Kou requested that a project be added to the workplan to
address groundwater for commercial projects. 
Mayor Burt asked if Staff was still working on the groundwater initiative. 
Mr. Shikada stated Staff will have to follow up with that information.  He
suggested that new projects be introduced through a Colleague’s Memo or in
the upcoming budget process. 
Vice Mayor Kou commented with all the new buildings coming forward, the
City should address the encroachment into the ground earlier rather than
later. 
Assistant Director of Public Works Karin North mentioned guidelines have
been put into place and the City tracked and monitored dewatering.  Staff
was evaluating groundwater in the Sea Level Rise Adaptation Plan. 
Vice Mayor Kou inquired when the Sea Level Rise, Sustainability Climate
Action Plan ( S/CAP) would be coming to Council.  
Ms. North predicted the vulnerability assessment would be released before
the summer of 2022. 
Council took a 10-minute break and resumed at 8:30 P.M. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
16. 
Receive the Police Department’s Annual Report and Discuss and Accept
the Staff Update on Radio Encryption as a Follow-up from the Policy
and Services Committee Recommendation on February 8, 2022. 
City Manager Ed Shikada explained the Council will hear the annual report
from the Chief of Police and then discuss radio encryption.  Staff had invited
two members from the media to provide their insight on encryption.  He
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
acknowledged the frustration and sense of powerlessness in addressing radio
encryption. 
Police Chief Robert Jonsen noted over the past several years the Palo Alto
Police Department ( PAPD) has had some challenging times.  Through the
challenges, PAPD continued to find better ways to serve the community and
has done tremendous work to update outdated systems, modify policies and
protocols, strengthen
accountability
measures
and expand the scope of
outside
review.  
Despite
shortages
inflicted
on
the
department, the
department continued to provide outstanding service to the community.  The
City continued to have a very low violent crime rate and over the last
decade, the City had averaged less than one homicide a year.  The most
prevalent crimes was related to property theft and hate incidents.  Palo
Alto’s dispatch center was the fourth busiest in Santa Clara County and the
24/hour dispatch center processed over 137,000 calls in the calendar year
2021.  Of the 137,000 calls, 38,189 were emergency calls and 99 percent of
those emergency calls were answered within 10 seconds.  Regarding Use of
Force ( UOF), there were 12 UOF incidents for the year 2021.  The PAPD had
started several initiatives in the year 2021 including diversifying the police
department, having the Independent Police Auditor ( IPA) audit the hiring
process and launching the Psychiatric Emergency Response Team ( PERT).  
He apologized to the Palo Alto community if the actions of the PAPD have
caused undue frustration regarding radio encryption.  In 2021, the City
became a member of the Silicon Valley Regional Interoperability Authority
SVRIA) which was dedicated to facilitating interoperable
voice and data
communication.  In February 2010 and then again in November 2016, Palo
Alto agreed and signed a Joint Powers Authority ( JPA) agreement that
established the SVRIA.  The City contributed to the radio system design, 
selection of the primary vendor and the implementation of the radio network
which included encryption.  On October 12, 2020, the California Department
of Justice ( DOJ) issued a memo that prohibited sharing personal identifiable
information ( PII) over the unsecure radio network.  All Santa Clara law
enforcement agencies and the SVRIA have complied with the DOJ Mandate.  
The
PAPD
followed
seven
other
county
agencies
and
implemented
encryption.  
All
agencies
have
achieved
compliance
through
radio
encryption.  In the year 2021, the PAPD proactively sent a letter to the DOJ
requesting a reprieve soon after the mandate was issued to allow for the
department to evaluate other alternatives to encryption.  That request was
denied, but PAPD continued to explore other options that provide residents
with information about Calls for Service in near real time.  Every employee
in PAPD has to sign an agreement to access the California Law Enforcement
Telecommunications
System (
CLETS).  
The
agreement
stated
that
information may not be shared with non-law enforcement personnel and
violating the agreement could result in loss of CLEFTS access.  Through the
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
CalChief Members Discussion Group, several agencies reached out to other
agencies throughout the State of California to explore how they handled the
DOJ Mandate.  
Four agencies
replied they comply to the DOJ Mandate
through the policy established by the California Highway Patrol ( CHP) but
shared they do not have the radio infrastructure to encrypt.  The City of
Roseville had dedicated one dispatcher to an encrypted channel and the
other dispatchers were dedicated to a non-encrypted channel.  When an
encrypted radio and unencrypted radio were operating in the same talk
room.  All communication becomes unencrypted and could lead to adverse
outcomes.  PAPD launched a Police Calls for Service Interactive Map on
January 31, 2022 to relay in real time crimes happening within the City while
protecting PII and criminal justice information.  
Dave Price, The Daily Post, emphasized that none of the media channels
want access to PII and believed that information should be protected.  
Historically, radio transmissions have been available to the public since the
1940s and encryption has become a First Amendment violation.  Often in
severe weather or criminal activity, the community cannot wait for a police
or fire departments to do a press release.  Often the media groups will send
a reporter out into the field with a police scanner to discover what was
happening in the community in real time.  He pointed out that the City of
Menlo Park, the City of East Palo Alto and San Mateo County do not use
encryption.  He did not agree there was an interoperability issue between
encrypted agencies and non-encrypted agencies.  He recommended Council
direct the City Manager to explore the CHP alternative for the City of Palo
Alto.  
Bill Johnson from the Palo Alto Weekly appreciated the Chief of Police
apologizing to the community.  He agreed with Mr. Price that encryption was
a matter of First Amendment concerns and public safety issues.  In a time
when there was a clear need for transparency with what the police were
doing country-wide.  The only transparency that existed at the local level
was the ability to listen to real time police radio traffic.  
Local media
provided a public service when they can report in real time what was
happening within the community
which reduced anxiety and panic.  
He
shared he was confused why Senator Josh Becker’s Senate Bill ( SB) 1000
was not included in the Staff report.  
He mentioned the Public Safety
Committee will be hearing SB 1000 in the next 2-weeks and he shared his
confusion as to why Staff was not seeking direction from Council on if the
City should support SB 1000 or not.  SB 1000 required that radio traffic be
made available to the public through either an unencrypted frequency, 
online
streaming
of
radio
traffic
or
providing
access
to
encrypted
commutations upon request and payment of a fee.  Also, all broadcasts that
contain PII must be used on an encrypted frequency on a mobile data
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
terminal or through telephone or text messaging.  He strongly encouraged
Council
to
support
SB
1000.  
Regarding
the
Police
Calls
to
Service
Interactive Map, the media was not involved in the discussion regarding the
tool. 
Mr. Jonsen
agreed
with
Mr. Price
and
Mr. Johnson
on
how
quickly
information is provided to the public.  Also, PAPD interacted with the City of
Menlo Park and the City of East Palo Alto on a very frequent basis and it did
require a collaboration.  Both City of Menlo Park and City of East Palo Alto
did not have the infrastructure to implement encryption whereas Palo Alto
invested in that infrastructure years ago.  Also, the City was part of the
SVRIA whereas San Mateo County was not.  He noted he asked Senator
Becker’s aide why the DOJ could not retract the mandate and they stated it
was too complicated.  
Coming in the next few months was the Military
Equipment Policy which stated all agencies in the State of California have to
adopt.  Assembly Bill ( AB) 481 addressed policy modifications pertaining to
public
disclosure
of existing
specialized
law
enforcement
equipment
or
military equipment.  
PAPD was not asking for additional equipment but
reporting on the equipment PAPD already had.  He emphasized that PAPD
does not have any equipment that was atypical for the region. 
Council Member Stone referenced the letter from the Attorney General’ s
Office dated July 2, 2021 that stated PAPD could not revert to the previous
system and broadcast PII on a non-encrypted channel.  He asked if PAPD
followed up on the letter and did PAPD gain clarification on what additional
actions could be taken to comply with the DOJ Mandate. 
Mr. Jonsen answered yes and that was why the CHP Policy was established.  
The City still has an unencrypted channel and so the City could follow the
City of Roseville’s approach.  The DOJ did not dictate how an agency follows
the mandate. 
Council Member Stone inquired if it was explicitly stated that Palo Alto could
not adopt the CHP Policy. 
Mr. Jonsen stated Santa Clara County was unique because it had a regional
authority.  If the City adopted a CHP Policy, the City would be taking on the
liability if PII was released on the open airway. 
Council Member Stone invited the City Attorney to weigh in on the Attorney
General’s letter and the Police Chief’s liability concerns.  
City Attorney Molly Stump stated the allocation of potential liability was a
process the City dealt with daily.  If Council wanted to adopt a CHP Policy, 
then a discussion could be held with SVRIA regarding liability. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Council Member DuBois asked if the media channels found any value in the
interactive map and what would make it more useful. 
Mr. Price stated the primary problem with the interactive map was it shared
the crime event after it had happened.  
He stated the map cannot be
redesigned to mimic real time live discussions. 
Mr. Johnson agreed and noted the interactive map did not share the texture
of what was happening during the incident.  He mentioned the City has a
computerized dispatch system that has GPS mapping and other information
that was relayed to officers in the field.  The system did not include PII and
he suggested having that data stream be available online. 
Council Member Filseth asked what options did SB 1000 present for Palo
Alto.  
Mr. Johnson explained the problems that Mr. Jonsen described that are
unique to Santa Clara County would be removed under SB 1000. 
Council Member Filseth remarked that SB 1000 referenced items that were
already being used. 
Mr. Jonsen believed if SB 1000 passed it would be similar to the DOJ
Mandate because PAPD would still have to comply with CLETS and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI) policies and security agreements.  He
predicted
many
agencies
would
continue
to use encryption
because it
guaranteed compliance.  
Council Member Filseth mentioned the cons of the two-channel model was
more dispatch Staffing and resources. 
Mr. Jonsen explained having dispatchers and officers going back and forth
between the two channels could result in them missing vital information.  He
shared he was curious to explore further the City of Roseville’s model of
having a dedicated frequency that put out only location awareness. 
Council Member Filseth inquired why the media could not have an encrypted
radio. 
Mr. Jonsen
stated
CLETS
would not authorize
the media to have
an
encrypted radio. 
Council Member Filseth understood from SB 1000 that any person interested
would be allowed access to encrypted information if the bill is passed. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Mr. Jonsen answered no. The CLETS policy stated any person authorized by
law to receive a record or information obtained from a record who knowingly
furnished the record or information not authorized by law to receive the
record or information was guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Mayor Burt asked if SB 1000 would supersede CLETS requirements. 
Ms. Stump explained CLETS requirements were derived from the State and
Federal Constitution from Federal Law that was administered by the FBI.  
The
State
legislature
did
not
have
the
authority
to
override
those
requirements. 
Council Member Filseth requested more details about the City’s current
equipment relaying information to officers in the field that could be live-
streamed online. 
Mr. Jonsen believed the Call for Service Interactive
Map provided that
information and the map could be adjusted to make the data available closer
to real time.  He noted there will be a 15-minute delay though. 
Vice Mayor Kou understood for emergencies all of Santa Clara County used
one system.  She asked for everyday occurrences if PAPD used a different
system. 
Mr. Jonsen
confirmed
PAPD
had
its
own
channel
it
uses
for
daily
occurrences.  
Vice Mayor Kou stated the benefit of having encryption was to allow all
agencies to switch over to the encrypted channel quickly.  She asked what
the difficulties were of having an encrypted channel and a non-encrypted
channel if both were already in place. 
Mr. Jonsen explained if Palo Alto used an unencrypted and there was a
mutual aid request.  If Palo Alto was patched into the encrypted channel
then all the information would become unencrypted.  He agreed there was a
possibility to have a separate unencrypted channel that was kept separate
from the encrypted channel. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if other jurisdictions were questioning the encryption
mandate. 
Mr. Price mentioned the Chief of Police for Santa Clara expressed concern
about losing public access to their radios.  He noted SB 1000, if adopted, 
would
require
all
police
agencies
to
convert
to
unencrypted
radio
frequencies.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Vice Mayor Kou shared she served on the SVRIA and represented the City of
Mountain View, the City of Los Alto and Palo Alto.  The other members of
SVRIA
have
not
shared
that their
communities
were
concerned
about
encryption and the loss of transparency.  SVRIA will be meeting on May 26, 
2022 and she invited folks to attend the meeting to share their concerns
about encryption.  
Public Comment
Bob Moss ( In Person) stated one issue that had been passed over was the
excessive UOF and employing officers who continued to issue excessive UOF.  
He agreed with the media that it was very important to provide timely and
complete information on police activity.  One benefit to having reporters on
the scene in real time was police officers
would be less likely to use
excessive UOF.  
Also, keeping the community informed would make the
community safer and increase neighborhood awareness. 
Hamilton Hitchings acknowledged PAPD’s commendable efforts to improve
the department.  He disagreed that an officer would be required to be near
their vehicle if a CHP Policy was implemented.  Any encrypted channel could
be rebroadcasted unencrypted through a repeater.  Also, each radio has two
channels that can be switched between quickly that can accommodate an
encrypted and non-encrypted channel.  He strongly encouraged Council not
to be deterred by the policies outlined
by SVRIA
and to correct the
transparency issue.  He stated the encryption of all police communication
was a step backward with negative long-term consequences for civil rights, 
public safety and media access.  He recommended the Council support SB
1000. 
Aram James appreciated Staff inviting local media to the discussion.  He
noted PAPD should have involved the media and the public early in the
process when encryption was first required.   
Rebecca Eisenberg stated PAPD was not instructed to encrypt but was told to
either encrypt or use other methods to communicate PII.  She emphasized it
has always been illegal to transmit PII through a radio. 
Winter
Dellenbach
greatly
appreciated
the
press’s
comments
about
encryption.  She echoed all of Mr. Hitching’s comments and strongly agreed
with them.  The City should support SB 1000 to facilitate a State-wide
solution.  She mentioned Chief Nickel’s memo raised many red flags and she
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
found the threatening nature of the memo very disturbing.  She found the
UOF report very flawed. 
Scott O’Neil announced he was speaking on behalf of himself.  He was
surprised to hear from the Chief of Police that PAPD was running smoothly
when in fact several disturbing incidents had occurred.  He found the culture
of police in the country very resistant to transparency and accountability.  
He did not find the Calls for Service Interactive Map a compelling idea to
promote transparency. 
Kat Snyder greatly appreciated Staff inviting the press.  
She tentatively
supported SB 1000 and stated police radio was one of the last ways the
community could provide oversight over the police.  
Joe Landers strongly supported the PERT initiative. Regarding encryption, PII
was not a public right and he believed that SB 1000 was not feasible to
implement.  He requested to hear from the CHP representative. 
Mayor Burt encouraged Council to address all the issues in the agenda item
and not focus solely on the encryption component. 
Council Member Stone believed the item went well with Council’s priority
regarding health and safety.  It was critical to have trust in the police
department and it was critical to restore the community’s faith in law
enforcement.  The Staff recommendation did not further those goals and he
could not support it.  He found the Staff report and memo from PAPD
frustrating.  He appreciated Staff inviting the media to share their comments
with the Council. Folks had the right to a free press and police radio
encryption
did not further
that right.  The Council should support a
correction of a major flaw in the City’s current policy.  He referenced PAPD’s
memo and inquired if the department felt that CHP was not in compliance
with the DOJ’s Mandate. 
Mr. Jonsen stated he could not say whether CHP was complying or not.  He
assumed CHP was complying with the DOJ Mandate because they had to
submit a policy to the DOJ for approval. 
Council Member Stone agreed that it was a high probability that CHP was
complying.  He struggled to understand why Palo Alto could not follow CHP’s
approach to modify the practices and protect PII from an unencrypted radio.  
He confirmed the DOJ Memo did not require PAPD to encrypt and did not
even list encryption as a way to restrict PII from being released. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Mr. Jonsen mentioned in 2017 the California Values Act was passed to
protect immigration enforcement and codified that law enforcement agencies
could not release PII over the open airway.  Listed under PII in the California
Values
Act
were
his
or
her
name, social
security
number, physical
description, home address, home telephone number, education, financial
matters and medical and employment history.  During every day incidences, 
officers needed to provide clarifying information to identify an individual.  
SVRIA recommended PAPD move toward encryption and that was why PAPD
did it.  He restated the process was complicated because many laws have to
be complied with too. 
Council Member Stone requested the CHP representative respond to Mr. 
Jonsen’s comments. 
Redwood City CHP Commander Jason Cavett confirmed that because of the
infrastructure and the low band.  The department was unable to encrypt as
per the DOJ Mandate.  The policy did not change any of the department’ s
radio transmission operations, but the department did go through training to
limit PII over the radio.  Also, it was true the officers were near their patrol
vehicles the majority of the time and motorcycle officers have tablets with
cell data.  He was not aware and could not speak to the comment that CHP
used other technologies to encrypt.  
Council Member Cormack was happy to see the Racial and Identity Profiling
Act ( RIPA) being implemented.   
The State report was to be published in
April 2023 but the City had collected 353 stop data records by the end of
January.  She wanted to know if that information had been shared with the
public already. 
Mr. Jonsen remarked he would have to check the RIPA compliance order. 
Council Member Cormack predicted many folks would be interested in having
that information sooner.  She asked if the statistic that the PERT team was
able to divert 22 people from psychiatric hospitalization was considered a
metric of success. 
Mr. Jonsen agreed the team was on the right track and the City should be
proud of all the programs that serve folks with mental crisis. 
Council Member Cormack recommended the metrics be included in the
annual report moving forward.  
She invited Mr. Jonsen to remind the
community what they can do to prevent property theft. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 21 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Mr. Jonsen applauded the Altaire Walk residents for taking responsibility for
their property and working together to reduce the opportunity for property
theft.  He stated if the opportunity is removed then the thefts will go down. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated the information about Staff’s linguistic
capabilities. 
Council Member DuBois mentioned there was a feeling in the community
that the City was in a crime wave but the 2021 Annual Report showed that
crime was down compared to prior years. 
Mr. Jonsen remarked that social media gives the perception that crime has
increased regionally, but the City had seen a decrease in crime in every
category. 
Council Member DuBois asked if there was data available that was more
detailed and provided dollar amounts and geographic distribution for thefts. 
Mr. Jonsen stated it was a matter of capacity and PAPD did not have the
Staff to take on that type of workload. 
Council Member DuBois acknowledged PAPD had 125 full-time equivalents
FTE) positions but he noticed PAPD’s budget was higher.  He requested
further details on that.  
Mr. Jonsen predicted the increase was due to salary and benefits.  He could
not recall any major contractual increases over the past several years. 
Council Member DuBois asked if there was a Staffing amount that would
minimize overtime by having more employees but would cost less. 
Mr. Jonsen confirmed many agencies will authorize overtime instead of
hiring a new FTE position because overtime was a fixed amount.  For the
year 2021,  overtime was allocated for suppression efforts. 
Council Member DuBois echoed Council Member Cormack’s comment about
having access to the RIPA data earlier.  Regarding the UOF Report, he asked
if the report only highlighted UOF that resulted in an injury. 
Mr. Jonsen stated in his opinion, anytime a person used physical effort to
overcome the resistance of another would fall under the definition of UOF.  
The current policy and protocol was to do a force package when there was
any type of injury. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 22 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Council Member DuBois wanted to see the outcomes of the situations that
the PERT team was dispatched to. 
Mr. Jonsen believed the Department of Behavioral Health was tracking the
data and would be producing a report.  The City was the first City in Santa
Clara County to deploy a PERT team, but Santa Clara County had three
teams. 
Council Member DuBois inquired if neighboring jurisdictions have reached
out and asked how the program was doing. 
Mr. Jonsen answered yes. 
Council Member Tanaka appreciated the report and thanked PAPD for their
work with Altaire Walk residents.  He inquired what caused the emergency
service calls to decrease from the year 2012 to 2020. 
Mr. Jonsen remarked the COVID-19 Pandemic hit which caused traffic to
decrease and restaurants and retail stores were closed. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed.  He asked why arson was at an all-time
high.  
Mr. Jonsen explained homeless folks were establishing encampments in
parking garages which resulted in fires.  PAPD and the Department of Public
Works continued to disband encampments. 
Council Member Tanaka believed with less activity in the City there would be
less crime, but larceny and theft were relatively high.  He wanted to
understand why. 
Mr. Jonsen explained that larceny was a combination of all situations that
pertained to theft.  Regarding stolen vehicles, that type of activity has
become a popular activity due to grab and runs. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked larceny was lower in prior years than in
years 2020 and 2021.  The population within the City had decreased due to
the COVID- 19 Pandemic but the crime rate was the same, if not higher. 
Mr. Jonsen argued during the year 2020, many vehicles were parked at
homes which increased car thefts. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 23 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Council Member Tanaka noted that the City of Mountain View did not see a
crime increase. 
Mr. Jonsen stated the vast majority of crime incidents that Palo Alto
residents were victims of were coming from criminals who are not Palo Alto
residents.  
Council Member Tanaka explained many members of the public have
expressed concerns about crime within the City and the statistics match
what residents have been saying.  
Mr. Jonsen agreed that crime rates will decrease with Council’s direction to
restore Staffing within PAPD. 
Mayor Burt was pleased to see how effective the PERT Program was.  He
pointed out there was a decrease in crime rates before the pandemic hit.  He
asked how many positions within PAPD have been Staffed versus authorized
positions.  
Mr. Jonsen answered there currently there were 125 FTE sworn positions but
PAPD was greatly affected by attrition.  The department had been successful
in filling non-sworn positions. 
Mayor Burt referenced a member of the public’s letter stating that the
Council should be receiving twice a year a UOF Report.  
Chief Andrew Binder confirmed the member of the public was correct.  The
Council gave direction to increase the scope of the IPA at the end of 2020.  
The first IPA report covered the period from July 1, 2020 to November 1, 
2021.  He concurred Staff can provide a UOF Report twice a year but it will
not include a large data set. 
Mayor Burt understood the current Police Policy Manual only required a UOF
report when there was an injury. 
Mr. Binder answered yes but all officers are required to document any type
of UOF and that report was reviewed and signed off by a supervisor.  If there
was an injury, then a Supervisor’s Report on Force is generated. 
Mayor Burt stated there was an important semantical distinction between
UOF and UOF that generated a Supervisor’s Report on Force.  He requested
that PAPD explain why they interpreted that reporting requirement was not
all UOF but rather all UOF that triggered a Supervisor’ s report. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 24 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Mr. Jonsen restated all UOF is documented in a criminal report.  If there was
an incident that could expose PAPD to civil liability, then a new report is
generated. 
Mayor Burt interjected Council wanted to know when all types of UOF
occurred and PAPD has a different threshold from what Council thought UOF
meant. 
Mr. Jonsen stated if Council wanted to know all UOF incidents then that
would require more Staff resources to comb through all criminal reports and
then document the UOF. 
Mayor Burt remarked the Council was not made aware that there was a
threshold.   
Mr. Jonsen
argued
Council
did
discuss
the
distinction
when
the
City
expanded the scope of the IPA. 
Council Member DuBois recalled pointing a gun at somebody was a UOF. 
Mr. Jonsen answered that was one of the modifications made to the policy
and was now considered a reportable incident. 
Mr. Binder confirmed PAPD will be incorporating those incidents in the UOF
Report. 
Mayor Burt mentioned that PAPD does not track ethnicity in UOF cases.  He
wanted to understand how the City could pursue collecting that data. 
Mr. Jonsen explained PAPD did evaluate the past five years’ UOF and arrest
data and created a report for the Council.   The RIPA data will provide a
concise data collection point that will include ethnicity.  
Vice Mayor
Kou shared that in March of 2021 Palo Alto appointed
a
representative on the SVRIA.  She found it concerning that encryption was
planned for since the year 2011 but Palo Alto residents did not know about
encryption until the changeover.  She advised the City to evaluate the JPA
with SVRIA and see what other options
are available.  
She expressed
concern about the statement in Director Nickle’s memo that the authority
will not take another member's non-compliance liability.  She commended
PAPD for the work that was accomplished even with decreased Staff.  Many
officers had expressed they were holding back
UOF because they are
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 25 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
concerned there will be repercussions.  She inquired if their hesitation was
hindering them from to do their job. 
Mr. Jonsen strongly agreed there was high concerns about outside scrutiny. 
He acknowledged that officers are empowered with tremendous authority, 
but many officers do not feel it is worth the scrutiny to use that authority.  
That thinking puts the officer and the community at risk.   
Vice Mayor Kou requested
PAPD to provide updates on addressing that
concern in the future. She requested
more details about the Explorer
Program. 
Mr. Jonsen shared the program was disbanded during budget cuts but
believed the program will resume shortly.  
Vice Mayor Kou asked how many new hirers come from the Explorer
Program. 
Mr. Jonsen commented the Explorer Program is used to recruit folks into the
police profession. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if there was a need to determine the ratio between
the number of officers to the population.  
Mr. Jonsen answered that the ratio was reviewed often.  During the last
evaluation, the City was receiving a higher number of psychiatric calls and
that was why Santa Clara County offer the PERT position to Palo Alto. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if having one PERT team was sufficient for the City.  
Mr. Jonsen stated the program was still new but the number of PERT teams
may increase as the program grows. 
Council Member Filseth stated SB 1000 allowed to either provide encrypted
scanners or have two channels. He wanted to understand why there was no
problem in the past when all radio frequencies were unencrypted.  
Ms. Stump confirmed there was a problem and City risk did include the
potential risk of a lawsuit from someone whose PII had been transmitted.  
Palo Alto had never received that type of lawsuit.  The biggest risk was the
regulatory risk. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 26 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Mr. Jonsen agreed there has always been an issue, but it had just been
allowed.  There was a combination of factors where other entities became
involved and the oversight became more enforced.  
Council Member Filseth understood the DOJ would not allow the City to
provide encrypted scanners to members of the public.  
Ms. Jonsen confirmed CLETS would not allow it. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the California
DOJ or the U.S DOJ was
providing the oversight. 
Mr. Jonsen answered the California DOJ. 
Council Member Filseth commented that SB 1000 may provide some relief to
local agencies.  
Mr. Jonsen restated PAPD would be violating the federal security protocol
agreement
because that was where criminal
database information
was
stored. 
Ms. Stump noted the City was waiting to hear what the California Attorney
General will say about SB 1000. 
Council Member Filseth stated the interactive map would not be allowed
under SB 1000. 
Mr. Jonsen noted PAPD was the only agency in the State of California that
had an interactive map.  
Council Member Filseth restated that SB 1000, as written, would not allow
that type of approach.  If adopted, the City would have to either have two
channels or provide encrypted scanners.  He asked what the second channel
was for CHP and San Mateo County. 
Mr. Jonsen explained they broadcast differently and have a protocol for
separating the information.  
Council Member Filseth inquired how CHP and San Mateo County complied
with the requirement that PII is sent over encrypted radio frequencies. 
Mr. Cavett explained CHP provided the last name only and eliminated any
other PII unless it was through the computer system or other measures.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 27 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Council Member Filseth summarized the second channel was through the
computer system.  
Mr. Cavett answered yes. A description can be put over the radio but must
not include any PII. 
Council
Member
Filseth
asked
if the
DOJ
has
approved
sending
any
information over an open channel. 
Mr. Cavett predicted no.  CHP did submit its policy and training to DOJ and
they approved it.  
Council Member Filseth inquired if an alternative protocol was included in the
letter sent from PAPD to the DOJ asking to revert to unencryption. 
Mr. Jonsen answered no. 
Council Member Filseth assumed the majority of Calls to Service were
internal to Palo Alto and did not interact with other agencies. 
Mr. Jonsen confirmed that is correct. 
Council Member Filseth asked if the City could have a protocol that Calls for
Service
within
Palo Alto are unencrypted
and calls working
with other
agencies are encrypted. 
Mr. Jonsen understood from Director Nickel’s memo that such a policy would
require Palo Alto to be removed from SVRIA. 
Council Member Filseth stated SB 1000 was highly relevant and the next
steps for encryption hinged on if SB 1000 was approved or not. 
Council Member Cormack stated the concerns about transparency and police
services being held more accountable were completely valid concerns.  She
referenced the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ( HIPPA) 
and summarized the problem was the City was not allowed to authorize a
small number of people to hear the information.  
HIPPA was another
approach the City could explore.  She understood that because the City has
the technology to encrypt, the City was not allowed to explore a different
policy. 
Mr. Jonsen stated that was PAPD’s understanding.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 28 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Council Member Cormack mentioned one possibility was the DOJ would not
allow Palo Alto to qualify for the exemption because the City was able to
implement encryption. 
Mr. Jonsen agreed. 
Council Member Cormack asked why PAPD had access to CLETS through the
City of Mountain View.  
Mr. Jonsen explained that PAPD shared a lot of resources with the City of
Mountain View and the City of Los Altos.  
Council Member Cormack wanted to know if the City would put the City of
Mountain View at risk if the City made a decision that was not consistent
with what the City of Mountain View was doing.  
Ms. Jonsen confirmed the City would be putting many agencies at risk.  
Council Member Cormack asked how much the City receives in State and
Federal Security Grant Funding.  
Mr. Jonsen announced he would have to follow up with the answer. 
Council Member Cormack inquired if PAPD’s Twitter account was updated in
real time. 
Mr. Jonsen confessed that PAPD’s social media could be improved. 
Council Member
Cormack
understood that the City of Roseville
had a
separate
dispatcher
who
listened
to
the
encrypted
conversation
and
translates it without PII. 
Mr. Jonsen confirmed that is correct and the information was broadcasted in
real time. 
Council Member
Cormack
inquired if the scenario
described
by SVRIA
regarding the in and out of text groups and chats was eliminated in the City
of Roseville’s system. 
Mr. Jonsen stated that would not be an issue. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to know if the City of Roseville’ s approach
was working well.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 29 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Mr. Binder remarked they have shared that there have been challenges.  
Officers have been on the encrypted channel and had a situation unfold.  The
other officers
were on the unencrypted
channel
and were unaware
a
situation was happening.  To address that, they assigned a dispatcher on
each channel but there were still officer safety concerns.  
Council Member Cormack suggested for a near-term solution, the City
should have two dispatchers.  Regarding SB 1000, she recommended the
Chair of the Policy and Services Committee ( P&S) work with Senator Becker.  
Regarding whether or not to restore non-sworn personnel to handle media
inquiries, she announced Council will have to consider that through the
budget process.  She appreciated PAPD trying to find other methods to relay
information to the public and she thanked the City Manager for inviting the
press to engage in the dialog.  
Mayor Burt noted SB 1000 provided three options with the third being online
streaming.  Based on the language in SB 1000, specific individuals would be
allowed to access the encrypted channel under HIPPA- like conditions. 
Mr. Jonsen understood that was the intent of SB 1000. 
Mayor Burt asked why the DOJ denied that.  
Mr. Jonsen
explained
the
language
in
the
CLETS
protocol
was
law
enforcement personnel only had access. 
Mayor Burt inquired what would it take to have real time online streaming. 
Mr. Jonsen remarked the technology was doable but a model had to be built.  
PulsePoint has the model but was not willing to expand it to police. 
Mayor
Burt
asked what would it take to make the
Calls for Service
Interactive Map as close to real time reporting as possible.  
Mr. Jonsen stated it was easy to adjust the timeframe but discussions have
to happen with the Police Unions.  
Mr. Shikada noted the Police Unions did raise a concern regarding officer
safety with real time information being posted. 
Mayor Burt argued how was that different than when all the calls were
unencrypted. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 30 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Mr. Jonsen wanted to continue the collaboration that was built with the
Police Unions and discuss it further with them. 
Mayor Burt did not understand why the Police Unions would be opposed to a
process when there was more exposure to officers when things were not
unencrypted.  
Mr. Jonsen stated there was a lot of concern from officers regarding safety. 
Mayor Burt noted CLETS was not put in place for officer safety. 
Mr. Jonsen confirmed it was put in place to protect PII.  
Mayor Burt understood the push back from the Police Union was to not allow
the City to do something that essentially was past practice. 
Mr. Shikada shared that the interactive map maintained a record of the call. 
Mayor Burt asked if having a record of the call increased the concern
regarding officer safety.   He believed a recorded call was not related to the
concern about officer safety. 
Mr. Jonsen noted officers had no problem with there being a record. Their
concern was they would still be on scene handling an incident and everyone
would know where they were.  
Mayor Burt inquired if that was different than nonencrypted. 
Mr. Jonsen shared one concern folks could see was officers would be located
in one area of the City and the criminals would go commit a crime in another
area of the City.   
Mayor Burt asked if the interactive map showed the officers on the scene or
just the location of the incident. 
Mr. Jonsen remarked the incident was being mapped. 
Mayor Burt stated when folks were listening to a call, they knew where
officers were going. 
Mr. Jonsen noted now those calls are marked on a map. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 31 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Mayor Burt wanted to explore all solutions to the problem that did not rely
on State legislation.  The interactive map was the best solution currently.  
He wanted to understand the legitimate concerns of the officers. 
Mr. Jonsen agreed.  He suggested using the City Manager’s idea to invite
members of the community to explore the interactive map and provide
feedback on how to make it better. 
Mr. Binder restated officers were concerned that their movements could be
more easily tracked on an interactive map than through radio transmission. 
Mayor
Burt highlighted
there
have
been
discussions
about
posting
the
locations for a specific amount of time and that would address officers’ 
concerns. 
Mr. Binder noted Mr. Jonsen and himself were trying to strike the balance
between the department, the Council and the community.  
Mayor Burt remarked the tension was between the CLETS Program and the
First Amendment of the Constitution. 
Council Member Stone commented the DOJ mandate did not express that
they would deny alternative methods for concealing PII if a city had the
technology to implement encryption.  He referenced the March 31, 2022
letter from SVRIA and asked how was CHP authorized to use mutual aid
radios when CHP did not use encryption. 
Mr. Jonsen explained a person would have to patch the unencrypted channel
into the encrypted channel.  When that happens, it exposed the encrypted
channels to digital radio. 
Mr. Cavett added CHP also used radios from other agencies that have
encrypted radios. 
Council Member Stone asked if the City’s unencrypted channel was digital or
analog. 
Mr. Jonsen answered all the channels are digital. 
Council Member Stone recall that it was not a complex procedure to switch
between channels on a radio. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 32 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Mr. Jonsen concurred.  In situations though, police officers have to respond
quickly and do not remember they moved from an encrypted channel to an
unencrypted channel. 
Council Member Stone summarized that PAPD has the capability of providing
access to unencrypted conversations but it was not the easiest solution to
the problem. 
ORIGINAL MOTION:  
Council Member Stone moved, seconded by Vice
Mayor Kou to direct staff and PAPD to:  
A. Contact State Department of Justice regarding CLETS and inform them
of: 
i. 
Operational deficiencies in our current digital system; and
ii. 
Inquire into whether PAPD can revert back to encryption only
after policies are implemented that will fully protect personal
identifying information ( PII) 
B. Direct staff and PAPD to develop policies in order to protect PII on
unencrypted radio transmission; 
C. Support Senator Becker’ s proposed SB 1000; 
D. Increase communications between PAPD senior staff and the media, as
staffing permits; and
E. Refer to Policy and Services Committee review and discussion of Use
of Force ( UOF) reports to evaluate current policies and effectiveness of
the UOF reports and recommend modifications if necessary. 
MOTION PASSED/ FAILED:  7-0
Mayor Burt remarked the motion referred to CLETS but the mandate was
from the State DOJ.  CLETS gave the directive that drove DOJ to direct local
agencies. 
Mr. Jonsen noted the DOJ was the authorizing authority. 
Ms. Stump understood the DOJ oversaw the CLETS Program. 
Mayor Burt wanted to understand from Mr. Jonsen if he had the Staff
resources to implement Item D of the motion.  
Mr. Jonsen reported PAPD did not have the Staffing. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 33 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Council Member Stone was supportive of changing the language in Item D to
reflect that the intention is to implement Item D when the department is
fully Staffed. 
Mayor Burt asked if any changes could be made now that would allow the
press to have access quickly to senior officers.  
Mr. Jonsen supported having a senior officer available for calls and to answer
questions. 
Council Member Stone could not foresee how the motion would willfully
disregard the Criminal Justice Information Services ( CJIS) Policy. 
Council Member DuBois expressed concern about Items A and B of the
motion.  
He
understood
the
motion
would
establish
a communication
protocol that no PII would go out unencrypted.  He recommended refining
the interactive map and post crimes while they are in progress.  Also, to
indicate in real time the severity of the situation and share the location of
the incident.  He supported having only registered users be able to access
the online tracker as well as post the incidents for a specific amount of time.  
If streaming was the quickest solution, then he supported it but wanted it to
be in real time and more precise.  He wanted to see the City retain the radio
encrypted line that was linked to the other agencies in Santa Clara County.  
He supported Items C, D and E of the motion.  
Mayor Burt asked if restricting access to the online streamline would be
more receptive to PAPD. 
Mr. Jonsen confirmed PAPD can support and implement Items C, D and E of
the motion.  Items A and B would be more challenging because they went
against the other Santa Clara County partners.  He asked for clarity on what
system Item A(i) was referring to. 
Council Member Stone answered the current digital radio system. 
Mr. Jonsen stated the argument was that there are no deficiencies in a
digital radio system and it complied with the DOJ Mandate.  There has not
been one incident where PII has been compromised over an encrypted
channel. 
Council Member Stone clarified there were deficiencies in the digital radio
system when police officers are in the Foothills. 
Mr. Shikada noted those may not be operational deficiencies so much as
they were characteristics of a radio signal. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 34 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Council Member Stone stated if there are no operation deficiencies then he
supported removing A(i).  
PROPOSED AMENDMENT: Mayor Burt proposed to change Item B of the
motion to develop policies to pursue real time streaming for Calls of Service
and with restricted access to the near real time streaming. 
Council Member Stone remarked some models work without encryption and
he wanted the City to explore those further.  
Mayor Burt noted those jurisdictions were not governed by the SVRIA. 
Council Member Stone understood if there was a mutual emergency then
PAPD would switch to the regional encrypted channel. 
Mr. Jonsen restated an unencrypted
channel has to be patched into the
encrypted channel. 
Council Member Stone declined the amendment. 
PROPOSED AMENDMENT RESTATED: On motion by Mayor Burt seconded
by Council Member DuBois to replace Item B: Develop policies to pursue
near real time streaming for Calls of Service with restricted access to the
near real time streaming and narrow location. 
Council Member DuBois seconded the amendment but suggested it include
the location of the incident. 
Information Technology Operation Manager Darren Numoto confirmed Staff
could pinpoint the location if the information is available.  
Mayor Burt asked if there are concerns about providing the specific address. 
Mr. Shikada suggested the amendment include discussing with labor groups
on achieving the stated goals.  He noted it was an officer safety concern on
providing the precise location of an incident in real time. 
Council
Member
DuBois
commented
that if there
are
concerns
about
providing the location in real time.  The system could be providing the
information quickly but would be unusable.  
Mayor Burt inquired if providing the information within 5-minutes of the
incident occurring was sufficient.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 35 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
Mr. Price answered it depended on the incident and for many incidents, a 5
or 15-minute delay in posting would be insufficient.  The benefit of radio
transmissions was they were immediate.  
Council Member DuBois withdrew his second to the amendment. 
Council Member Cormack seconded the amendment but suggested language
changes to the amendment. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked how PulsePoint worked. 
Mr. Jonsen
explained
the dispatcher
enters
the
call into the
system, 
PulsePoint
extracted
the
data from the system
and
placed it on the
PulsePoint App. 
Vice Mayor Kou wanted to know how long that process took. 
Mr. Jonsen answered it has a 15-minute delay. 
Council Member Tanaka asked how PII would be concealed in Item A(i) of
the motion.  
Mr. Jonsen confirmed the City would have to develop a policy where PII was
not part of the system. 
Council Member Tanaka inquired if there were concerns about having a
registration system for folks to access the encrypted conversations. 
Mr. Jonsen apologized and confessed he misunderstood the question.  There
was no PII on the Calls for Service Interactive Map. 
PROPOSED
AMENDMENT
AS
REVISED: On
motion
by
Mayor
Burt
seconded by Council Member Cormack to delete A and replace as B: Develop
programs to pursue near real time streaming of Calls for Services and to
narrow location of the calls. Registration
will be required to access the
platform. Staff shall confer with labor on implementation of this direction.   
Council Member Stone wanted to know what the timeframe would be for
implementing the online streaming. 
Mr. Shikada predicted 2- to 4-weeks. 
Mr. Numoto confirmed it would be at least 4-weeks. 
Council Member Filseth stated the original motion wanted to explore the CHP
model and the amendment wanted to make the streaming solution work.  He
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 36 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
stated it was important to work with the press on the online streaming
because the point of the item was to facilitate transparency.  He supported
moving forward with the streaming solution but noted SB 1000, if it passed, 
will not support a streaming service.  He encouraged the City to work with
Senate Becker on the language of SB 1000. 
Vice Mayor Kou supported deleting A(i) but foresaw no concerns with A(ii). 
Council Member Cormack stated the City already used encryption and so the
City could not revert back to encryption. 
Council Member Filseth understood A(ii) meant to revert to the CHP model. 
Council Member Stone clarified it should say un-encrypted.  
Council Member Cormack agreed the item was a two-step problem and Item
C was step two.  The focus of the motion was to identify options that were
available now and would allow the City to function in a disaster.  The answer
was to remain encrypted to continue the partnership with the other agencies
in Santa Clara County. 
Motion to approve Amendment: Approved 6-1, Stone No
Mr. Shikada recommended the motion allow Staff to seek amendments to
authorize the streaming solution as part of SB 1000. 
Council Member Stone declined.  
Mayor Burt confessed he was not clear on the definition regarding online
streaming of radio communications in SB 1000. 
Deputy City Manager Chantal Cotton-Gaines remarked a letter of support for
SB 1000 could include the high-level concerns that have been referred to in
the discussion.  
REVISED MOTION:  
Council Member Stone moved, seconded by Vice
Mayor Kou to direct staff and PAPD to:  
A. Contact State Department of Justice regarding CLETS and inform them
of: 
i. 
Operational deficiencies in our current digital system; and
ii. 
Inquire into whether PAPD can revert back to encryption only
after policies are implemented that will fully protect personal
identifying information ( PII) 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 37 of 37
Sp. City Council
Meeting
Summary
Minutes:
4/ 4/ 2022
B. Develop programs to pursue near real time streaming of Calls for
Services and to narrow location of the calls. Registration will be
required
to access
the platform. Staff shall confer with labor
on
implementation of this direction; 
C. Support Senator Becker’ s proposed SB 1000; 
D. Increase communications between PAPD senior staff and the media, as
staffing permits; and
E. Refer to Policy and Services Committee review and discussion of Use
of Force ( UOF) reports to evaluate current policies and effectiveness of
the UOF reports and recommend modifications if necessary. 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0
17. 
Clarification of In-Person Attendance Protocols for Council Committees
and Boards and Commissions. 
Mayor Burt announced item 17 would be continued to a future meeting.  
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements
Vice Mayor Kou announced planning had begun for AAIP Heritage Month in
May.  The month of April was National Volunteer Month and she invited
Council Members to serve meals a La Comida.  
Mayor Burt mentioned Senator Becker held a town hall meeting on funding
for grade separations.  The Metropolitan Transportation Commission ( MCT) 
continued to develop criteria to allocate the funds and prioritized projects
based on shovel- ready and safety.  He submitted a letter to Santa Clara
Valley Transportation Association ( VTA) requesting to grant the City latitude
for using Measure B funds to draft the remaining engineering studies as well
as construct related bicycle and pedestrian separation
upgrades.  
VTA
provided preliminary support for the request. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 12:45 P.M. 
