CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 31 
Special Meeting 
 
October 24, 2022 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Present Remotely:  
None 
Absent: 
 
 
None  
 
Special Orders of the Day 
1. 
Appreciation for Joe Simitian, Santa Clara County Supervisor, for 
Advocacy on Behalf of the Palo Alto Community for affordable housing 
and support for mental health, and services to unhoused Palo Altans 
(including the $4 Million Challenge Grant in Support of Palo Alto 
Homekey) 
Action: No action was taken  
Mayor Burt expressed appreciation for Supervisor Joe Simitian regarding 
initiatives he led supporting interest in the North County, the community, 
and those in need in the community. His history in the community, his role 
as a County Supervisor, and his achievements were addressed.  
Santa Clara County Supervisor Joe Simitian thanked and exhorted the 
Council in terms of the work being done in partnership. He expressed his 
appreciation of staff. He reminded everyone of a county COVID vaccine site 
at the old San Antonio shopping center in Mountain View, and appointments 
being available at sccfreevax.org. He referenced healthcare costs and the 
MedAssist program and provided website information. He thanked Council 
Members Cormack, DuBois, and Filseth for their service. 
Council member DuBois expressed his appreciation of Supervisor Simitian 
and his projects helping people in need. 
Council Member Cormack declared Supervisor Simitian did an excellent job 
bridging the roles of the county and the county health department and 
thanked him for the bike bridge at the south end of Palo Alto. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Council Member Stone appreciated the leadership and the partnership with 
Palo Alto and Palo Alto Police through the Park Program and the MCRT and 
Supervisor Simitian going above and beyond by attending every community 
event and meeting.  
Council Member Filseth spoke of it being a pleasure working with Supervisor 
Simitian and his trust in him. He seconded Council Member DuBois’ 
comments. He considered Supervisor Simitian one of the most effective 
public servants in the entire Bay Area.  
Vice Mayor Kou thanked Supervisor Simitian and agreed with Council 
Members Filseth and DuBois’ comments. She stated the projects Supervisor 
Simitian brought forward were great and had been realistic and 
understanding of people. She hoped La Comida would be continued.  
Council Member Tanaka thanked Supervisor Simitian for his service and was 
appreciative.  
Mayor Burt commented on Buena Vista and his attending a film festival on 
preservation of trailer parks in the U.S., and there being battles, division, 
and lack of support of cities’ elected officials for efforts to support members 
of the community living in market rate affordable housing sites. The 
filmmaker wanted to include Buena Vista as it was viewed as the number 
one success story with respect to unanimity of support from City Council, the 
community, Supervisor Simitian, and the Board of Supervisors. A lot of 
people participated in Buena Vista, but if there were one elected official who 
deserved credit, it was Supervisor Simitian and his commitment.  
Public Comments 
Ken Horowitz stated the Council mentioned everything he was going to say. 
Supervisor Simitian had done much in regard to health for Palo Alto’s 
residents. He suggested watching the Board of Supervisors and the Health 
and Hospital meetings to see Supervisor Simitian’s adamancy for District 5.  
Liz Gardner shared her pleasure of being appointed under Supervisor 
Simitian for four years and him being accessible, inclusive, strong, and 
courageous in fighting for Palo Alto. Supervisor Simitian had done much for 
the needy, but he also provided the Council understanding that the needy 
could contribute and help the community, and he had educated the Council 
on inclusivity, fairness, and equitability.  
Winter Dellenbach indicated people at Buena Vista held Supervisor Simitian 
in their hearts for his help and remarked on his fine character.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Aram James commented on the death penalty and Supervisor Simitian 
supporting an inmate who had been wrongfully accused. He thanked him for 
forwarding critical issues regarding human rights, the criminal justice 
system, and the Prison Industrial Complex.  
Roberta Ahlquist applauded Supervisor Simitian and hoped he would stay 
with Palo Alto. His help was needed to pressure Stanford to build housing on 
the campus and to work with developers finding parcels for low/moderate-
income housing.  
Karen Holman admired Supervisor Simitian for many things and thanked him 
for remembering his roots and the needs of others, always being humble, 
engaged, approachable, patient, courageous, right-thinking, clearheaded, 
and committed and being a partner and friend to all. She was grateful for 
the stance he took for open space for the environment and for housing. A 
person’s staff said much about a person, and his staff was remarkable.  
2. 
The Great California Shakeout 
Action: No action was taken  
Mayor Burt noted Chief of Emergency Services Kenneth Deuker would lead 
the Council in a drop, cover, and hold simulated earthquake exercise. 
Chief Deuker provided context regarding pillars of support being leadership 
and being at a grassroots level, including elected officials, staff, and the 
community. He reminded Palo Alto of the three categories of risk and hazard 
relevant to Palo Alto – natural disaster, technological AKA accidental, and 
human caused. He implored that decisions for Palo Alto be made considering 
implications for those hazards and threats. Shakeout.org provided the 
largest earthquake exercise in the world and could be done virtually or on 
one’s own time. He invited Members to follow along physically with the drop, 
cover, and hold exercise he would demonstrate and explained what 
dropping, covering and holding entailed.  
Study Session 
3. 
Crime Mitigation Strategies through the Use of Automated License 
Plate Recognition (ALPR) Technology 
Action: No action was taken  
Chief of Police Andrew Binder introduced Acting Police Captain James 
Reifschneider who would present a PowerPoint. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Acting Captain Reifschneider expressed the goal for the presentation was to 
provide information regarding a piece of technology becoming more 
widespread in its use in the region and may have had potential application 
and benefits in Palo Alto. He requested feedback from the Council with the 
idea of potentially coming back in the future with an action item with more 
detailed discussion, recommendations, etc., for possible deployment, policy 
development, etc. He discussed how ALPR technology worked, potential 
problems it could address, and considerations for the technology coinciding 
with reduced budgets, etc. He addressed mobile and fixed ALPR; information 
that would and would not be captured; uses and benefits of proactive and 
reactive ALPR; how it worked and the chronological order of events; and 
policy considerations regarding access and data integrity and retention. Palo 
Alto would probably mimic many agencies in the Bay Area utilizing ALPR as 
far as deployment, transparency by using a portal providing real-time 
information to the community, and data security, sharing, and retention. 
Legal considerations were referenced that would be relevant if the 
Department were to return to the Council with an action item. The 
requirements of the Surveillance Technology Ordinance and the California 
Civil Code were reviewed. Fixed ALRP could be deployed through leasing or 
purchasing the equipment, and an estimated cost was supplied. There could 
be a pilot project for a year or two. They envisioned reporting back to the 
Council on an annual basis the number of searches, successes, etc. It would 
provide the potential for a cost effective force multiplier as the cost of rollout 
and ongoing costs would be less than that of a single officer on the street 
and would provide information 24/7 on any number of intersections. He 
named a few agencies in the county that had rolled out fixed and mobile 
ALPR technology experiencing publicized successes. He invited Los Gatos 
Monte Sereno Police Captain Clinton Tada and Los Gatos Investigations 
Sergeant Bill Hoyt to share their experiences. 
Captain Clinton Tada shared experiences of their two-year ALPR pilot 
program that was initiated in 2021. They believed the technology was a 
force 
multiplier 
in 
combating 
criminal 
activity. 
He 
indicated 
that 
Investigations Sergeant Hoyt would provide examples how Los Gatos and 
Monte Sereno had utilized the technology and would review recent statistical 
measures since implementation of the program recently published and 
shared with their Council. 
Investigations Sergeant Hoyt noted they had great success with the program 
and had started with a blank slate in terms of policy. They had considered 
how the desire to serve the community could best be represented while also 
protecting the community from over-reaches in terms of privacy. He spoke 
of efforts to mitigate concerns in reports initially brought forth. He 
encouraged looking at the transparency portal through the Los Gatos Monte 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Sereno Police Department website. He referenced recent statistics. From a 
privacy perspective, they elected to not share data with any other users of 
the platform; however, they allowed agencies to call with specific data, and 
then Los Gatos Monte Sereno would do the research.  
Acting Captain Reifschneider used an illustration of an armed robbery that 
occurred and provided a potential application of the ALPR technology. He 
requested 
Council’s 
feedback 
and 
a 
discussion 
of 
the 
potential 
implementation of the technology and then applying that to potentially 
identify a vendor, product, policy, etc. He imagined community feedback 
would also be solicited and implemented. The next step would be a 
procurement process and eventually, consistent with the Surveillance 
Ordinance, a return to the Council with an action item, which would include a 
draft contract, draft deployment plan, and an associated surveillance use 
policy for Council’s approval.  
Council Member Cormack asked if there was a pilot program how success 
would be determined, why non-hit data would be sent to the vendor, and 
how the automated alerts would work.  
Acting Captain Reifschneider answered there were several metrics that 
would be tracked. Sending the data to the vendor was synonymous with 
storing the data. There could be investment in City infrastructure but would 
come with a cost. He provided an example of the value of capturing and 
storing data that may not be recognized as a hit. Potential criteria that may 
have been used to determine where ALPR would be deployed was furnished. 
He envisioned 20 cameras throughout the City in high-activity areas. They 
would be in control how automated alerts would go out, and an example was 
presented.    
Council Member Stone inquired if the ALPR technology would alert officers to 
only stolen vehicles and/or people with arrest warrants or would it include 
alerts for vehicles associated with a person on parole, etc., with a search 
provision; who would have control over information being captured and who 
it would be shared with; if private companies operating ALPR cameras used 
data only for helping police departments solve crimes; and the process for 
connecting cameras in the mall, for example, to be shared with the Police 
Department in real time. He wanted to see next steps in developing the 
policy come back to City Council, a natural next step being vetting by the 
Human Relations Commission; partnership with the PD and the ACLU; and 
policies developed in the program that would objectively place cameras in 
areas with documented high levels of crime or equitably distributed across 
the City. He was concerned of targeting areas of the City or neighboring 
cities with a disproportionate amount of demographics historically targeted 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
by police agencies and wanted policy regarding that. He liked the idea of the 
pilot program. The risk to privacy appeared to be minimal.  
Acting Captain Reifschneider commented the ALRP technology would not 
trigger on vehicles owned by folks subject to supervision. It would trigger 
from an entry made into the system that a vehicle had been identified as 
stolen, etc. An entry could be made in the system of a vehicle associated 
with a felony and request another agency effect a stop on the vehicle. There 
would also be automated entries of missing people. Palo Alto would have 
control as far as sharing information, and that data would not be transmitted 
to a clearing house where other agencies could log in and make a query. The 
mall was in the process of rolling out ALPR and was interested in connecting 
cameras to the Police Department. Entities had ALPR for a variety of 
reasons, which may have had nothing to do with law enforcement.  
Council Member Filseth thought this was a logical direction to go. He 
questioned if the raw data would go to the vendor and then PAPD would 
have access and who would decide that processing; if there was a 
mechanism of a central database subscription linking areas outside Palo 
Alto; and if the system identified a stolen vehicle why an image of the driver 
would not be captured.  
Acting Captain Reifschneider confirmed the raw data would go to the vendor 
and could be accessed by the PAPD. As for the process, policy setting would 
determine what circumstances an officer could access data, and policy would 
be set, monitored, and manage with the Department, which City Council 
would play a role at some level. As for a central database, there was the 
SVS system for stolen vehicles regardless of ALPR, which ALPR systems 
would draw data from. Not capturing images of drivers was a technology and 
a policy issue.  
Council Member DuBois asked if data from the license plate reader for 
parking enforcement could be used as a pilot and if images of people would 
be captured if they were in the back seat. The California law overlapped to a 
good degree the Surveillance Ordinance. Proactive versus reactive ALPR 
seemed different. He inquired if 30-day data retention included good plates 
that were captured. He was interested in vendors offering only systems that 
were more the investigative functionality and what was being looked for and 
then triggering off those things versus capturing everything going by. He 
questioned if the system could be upgraded to be used for speeding 
violations, etc. It should be clear what the system would be used for. He was 
concerned about logging valid cars for 30 days and the federal government 
requiring data being retained, so thought needed to be given to the 
retention policies. Determination of camera placement needed to be clear. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
He discussed cost needing to be balanced regarding cost of the cameras and 
annual costs. A situation of a vendor being motivated to generate as much 
revenue as possible needed to be avoided. He desired the City to own the 
data and the data to be anonymized and possibly the Planning Department 
using the data for traffic analysis.  
Acting Captain Reifschneider believed they did not have access to the data 
from the license plate reader for parking enforcement. If someone were 
sitting in the back seat and facing rearward, there was the possibility of 
capturing a blurry image, but cameras would be hyper-focused on capturing 
a high quality image of the plate. The 30-day data retention included good 
plates that were captured. In reference to a system upgrade, he did not 
believe the current vendors offered a product used for traffic violations. 
Community privacy organizations had expressed concern about technology 
being used for low-level offenses. The Police Department wanted ALPR 
reserved for enforcement of criminal behavior.  
Vice Mayor Kou questioned with successful pilot programs in other cities why 
we would do a pilot program when we could move forward with 
implementation; the number of cameras that would be deployed; the pros 
and cons of having signage and of sharing data; if there would be 
background security checks on vendors; and if we had seen the one-year 
annual report on the license plate reader. She wanted signage and sharing 
of data. 
Acting Captain Reifschneider stated a pilot program was Council’s decision, 
but each communities’ needs, balance of privacy protection, and collection of 
information was different. A pilot program would provide the ability to assess 
privacy considerations and efficacy of the program. The number of cameras 
deployed would the outcome of Council’s feedback. About 20 cameras would 
be needed for busy commercial areas where there were a lot of police 
reports. Signage would act as an additional deterrent and was a policy 
decision. Collecting one’s own data but not sharing it with other agencies 
would give the greatest degree of control, but if data was not shared, others 
would not share their data, which would be a limitation on investigators. 
There were two main vendors in the area, both reputable, and there would 
be an internal process to validate security measures.  
City Attorney Molly Stump stated the City was behind on the annual report 
of the surveillance technologies, and they would work on it and put in place 
a procedure to be prompted annually. 
Council member Tanaka thought the program looked well developed. He had 
spoken with the Danville Police Chief and others both of whom adopted 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
similar systems and put them in hotspot areas, and they were ecstatic with 
the results. He had also spoken with the ACLU, and it seemed the Police 
Department was trying to do best practices. He asked which vendors they 
were considering. Having cameras at high traffic areas made sense. Sharing 
data was the most powerful use of this. He liked the idea of proactive 
deployments. He was in favor of accelerating or not having a pilot. He 
supported the effort.  
City Attorney Stump declared regarding the vendors that they wanted to be 
careful to protect the competitive process and if the Council gave direction to 
move forward, a solicitation would be issued that would be open to all.  
Mayor Burt commented the report addressed his highest concerns of having 
only rear monitoring of vehicles and how data would be shared and stored 
and 
seemed 
to 
address 
concerns 
of 
racial 
profiling 
and 
tracing 
undocumented residents. He wanted the vendor to have adequate security 
and the ability to rescind the policy if an attempt was made federally to 
access the data. He asked how critical was the 30-day retention. He was not 
interested in fulfilling the purpose for having a value for anonymized traffic 
data as there were tools already available for that.  
Acting Captain Reifschneider indicated the 30-day retention of data had 
more investigative value than real-time data.  
Public Comment  
Liz Gardner would like to see a vote to the Palo Alto residents if this 
advances and some examples of scanners in diverse areas other than 
predominately white cities in the Bay Area. She questioned how the 
technology would advance, if the cameras would be running at the same 
time, and if continuous pictures were going to be taken of people living in 
vehicles.  
Aram James remarked that having a report from the ACLU was not the same 
as having them present to ask questions and requested getting the  
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) and the ACLU involved in the decision. 
He believed the K9 Unit should be quashed and tasers relooked at and that 
money used for a program like this.   
Megan Kawkab had had license plate reading cameras installed at their 
business since 2018 and guaranteed one could not see into vehicles. They 
had caught numerous crimes with the cameras. She provided some financial 
and technological information for the company OpenALRP, which they used 
and asked the Council to contact her if there were questions.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Winter Dellenbach found the subject discouraging and thanked Council 
Member DuBois for his comments. She encouraged engagement of the EFF. 
She presented slides showing crime data. She addressed the data being kept 
for 30 days.  
Hamilton Hitchings indicated ALPRs were a powerful tool to reduce crime and 
could reduce bias in traffic stops. He liked the idea of having an automatic 
rescinding policy regarding sharing data and agreed with Council Member 
DuBois regarding privacy concerns and suggested not retaining non-hits for 
query and sharing of data being for only a known warrant, etc.  
Julie Beer thanked Council Member DuBois and Mayor Burt for their 
comments. She was concerned about civil liberties. She did not understand 
why Palo Alto would pay for this on the properties of Stanford, Apple, etc. 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
Mayor Burt stated there was the possibility of a later adjustment due to 
being behind schedule. As the agenda adjustment would not yet be made, 
he wanted guidance from the City Attorney regarding possibly being partway 
through Item 9 but pausing and moving to Item 10 and continuing Item 9 to 
a future date.  
City Attorney Molly Stump suggested checking with the Planning Director but 
believed the Public Hearing Notification suggested giving consideration to 
continuing it to a date certain so it would not have to be re-noticed. She 
suspected if it was continued to a date uncertain, it would have to be re-
noticed.  
Mayor Burt requested staff try to identify a date certain by the middle of that 
item.   
Public Comments 
Mayor Burt specified the next item was public comment on items not 
otherwise on the agenda.  
Ken Horowitz commented Veteran’s Day should be scheduled for November 
11, not November 7 and hoped to hear from the City Manager regarding 
that. He wished the Mayor to comment concerning reports of a School City 
liaison meeting on Thursday, commenting that Cubberley had come up, and 
he was not sure why conversation was being continued with the 
superintendent and requested the City Council proceed with the Cubberley 
Community Center on its own and get out of the lease.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Liz Gardner referenced the study session on Creekside and it being hard to 
hear assumptions being made about the deli and safe routes to school. It 
was not clear why the deli owner or manager was not present during the 
session and no map was provided of the route. There had been unsolicited 
emails from elected and former council members asking for certain supports 
of votes for candidates, and she believed they were not engaging with 
residents and asked that residents and constituents be engaged when 
making arguments to shut down a good plan for rental housing. 
Aram James believed the police getting more dogs was a unilateral decision 
with no outreach. He read an article concerning this from the Post. He 
encouraged the public to contact Chief of Police Andrew Binder to voice their 
opinions of his administration. He requested banning biting canines in the 
City. 
Megan Kawkab was thrilled with Chief Binder and the job he was doing. She 
felt the canines did a valuable service and were not dangerous. Her LPR 
cameras erased all data at 30 days, but a specific plate could be queried for 
one year with a request, and she would be happy to share with the Council 
information regarding her system. The City would benefit with such a 
system.  
Winter Dellenbach noted the VA had a second spill of diesel fuel near 
Matadero Creek and opined the report was notable for what it did not 
include. It seemed the VA might be open to preventative secondary 
containment around the generator room and the diesel tanks to prevent 
contaminating soil and asked if anything could be done.  
Julia Zeitlin thanked the Council for approving progressive climate policies 
that helped propel Palo Alto ahead of state requirements and goals by 
surrounding cities. She encouraged council members to attend the Climate 
Summit on November 12 at Gun High School from 1:00 to 4:00. 
Bob Moss commented on the lack of housing and that a source of housing 
overlooked was vacant houses. Articles in the paper reported other cities in 
Santa Clara County were fining property owners for leaving houses vacant, 
and he recommended Palo Alto do something like that and possibly listing 
vacant houses and counting them against the need for additional housing, 
which may cut the number of required housing units down.  
Consent Calendar 
Mayor Burt forewarned it may have had to be determined how much time 
Council would have for discussion and how much would be deferred 
regarding Item 9, which would be announced.   
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
4. 
Approval of Contract Amendment No. Two with GovernmentJobs.com, 
Inc. dba Neogov for Recruiting and Onboarding Services, to Extend the 
Term 
through 
June 
30, 
2025, 
Add 
Services, 
and 
Increase 
Compensation by an Amount Not-To-Exceed $249,883 for a New 
Contract Total Not-To-Exceed Amount of $411,323 
5. 
Adoption of Resolution 10080 Authorizing a City Application for the 
State Permanent Local Housing 
Allocation 
(PLHA) Funds and 
Authorization of City Manager or Designee to Manage the Allocation 
6. 
Approval of Fiscal Year 2022 Reappropriation Requests to be Carried 
Forward Into Fiscal Year 2023 and Budget Amendments in Various 
Funds 
7. 
Approval of a Professional Services Agreement Contract Number 
C23185658 With BKF Engineers for the Amount of $900,000 Over a 3-
year Term for On-Call Surveying and Design Support Services  
8. 
Approve the Parks and Recreation Commission Recommendation for a 
New Skate Park; Authorize the Friends of Palo Alto Parks to begin 
Fundraising; and Direct Staff to Support Outreach  
MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 4-8. 
Council Member Tanaka registered a no vote on Agenda Item Number 6. 
MOTION PASSED: Items 4, 5, 7, 8: 7-0  
MOTION PASSED: Item 6: 6-1, Tanaka no 
Council Member Tanaka stated reappropriations tended to be routine, but 
this year voters were being asked to pass $17M in fee and tax increases, 
and it would have been a good time to trim some unspent funding. He had 
also voted no on some of the reappropriations.  
Public Comment 
Aram James was delighted to see Item 8, the Skate Park, would move 
forward, which his son supported. He was willing to contribute funds to get it 
off the ground. 
City Manager Comments 
City Manager Ed Shikada noted the public comment suggesting the Police 
Chief had committed to special outreach related to refilling attrition in the K9 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Unit was not correct, that it was a funded and ongoing program. He 
presented slides and provided a weekly update related to the pandemic and 
updates related to election resources available online; upcoming Halloween 
events; online WaterSmart tools; and upcoming Council items. There would 
be no Council meeting October 31. The next meeting would be November 7 
with an Economic Development Study Session; November 14, the 
biannual/semiannual meeting with the independent police auditor and a gas-
powered leaf blowers item; and November 28, the joint meeting with the 
PTC regarding the Housing Element, noting that there would be no meeting 
on November 21. The S/CAP three-year work plan and Fiber to the Premesis 
follow-up items related to recent Council discussions would be in December. 
Should the NVCAP item be deferred or continued, staff recommended it be 
continued on November 14 and likely defer the gas-powered leaf blower 
item. Agendas for the remainder of the calendar year were full, and it was 
possible the leaf blower item would need to be deferred until after the first of 
the year.  
Mayor Burt requested what may prevent the NVCAP continuation on the 
November 7th agenda.  
City Clerk Lesley Milton stated the draft agenda for November 7 included the 
Economic Development Study Session, a Planning and Transportation 
Commission recommendation for amending Title 18, discussion of the 
Council values and legislative update, the last two items coming back from 
Policy and Services Committee.  
[The Council took a 15-minute break] 
Action Items  
Mayor Burt declared Item 9 would begin. Being behind schedule, the 
intention was to hear the staff report, hear from members of the public, and 
begin Council discussions if time allowed. If time did not allow, the item 
would be continued to November 14.  
9. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Staff Recommend the City Council Review the North 
Ventura Coordinated Area Plan (NVCAP) Refined Preferred Alternative, 
Take Public Comment, and Endorse the Refined Preferred Alternative 
Plan.  
Planning and Transportation Director Jonathan Lait noted the Council gave 
very specific direction earlier in 2022 on the plan, so they were in front of 
the Council because they were about to initiate the environmental analysis 
and start putting together the draft plan. Before that was done, they wanted 
feedback from City Council on four discrete items, so it could be 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
incorporated into the plan. He noted that Principal Planner Sheldon AhSing 
would talk about the project and specifically the four items. He requested 
guidance from the Council that night and then they could continue their 
work. Otherwise, they could return on the 14th.  
Principal Planner AhSing addressed the items of height transitions at El 
Camino Real and Oregon Expressway, additional height for affordable 
housing site regarding the Portage Development Agreement that was in 
process, use of TDM (Transportation Demand Management) to alleviate 
traffic concerns regarding office development, and implanting parking 
maximums, which the state recently abolished parking minimums for 
properties within one-half mile of train stations. They were in the process of 
getting a plan update due to happenings since January 2022, and they 
wanted to provide context relating to the four items. He furnished slides. He 
spoke of being on track to adopt the plan in the summer of 2023 and had a 
hard stop in December due to the grant. He presented the January 10 
Council Motion of the topics affecting the items for current discussion. He 
referenced the Portage Development Agreement and indicated the 
differences between the NVCAP and the Sobrato Development Project; AB 
2097 
(Parking 
Near 
Transit); 
MTC 
Transit 
Oriented 
Communities 
development policies; the Palo Alto Housing Element potentials and policies; 
and projected heights for the planned area. He discussed height transitions, 
limits, and their proposal and was seeking feedback. Regarding TDM, the 
Council had directed the creation of a TDM low-density employment district. 
He expressed the density had changed over time and proposed establishing 
traffic associated with a low-employment district and implementing a TDM 
meeting the targets. He discussed the governor signing AB 2097, and 
Principal Planner AhSing proposed the parking maximum standard, so the 
minimums become the maximums, and explained his reasoning for such. He 
wanted Council feedback of the plan. The NVCAP drafts were expected in the 
fall. They would analyze traffic and other technical aspects and initiate a 
CEQA for the project in December and would have meetings next year with 
ARB, PTC, and the Council to consider the CEQA and adoption of the plan.  
Confirmation was needed concerning height transitions along El Camino 
Real; additional height up to seven stories for affordable housing site 
adjacent to cannery; implementation of TDM for office uses to address 
employment density concerns; and implementation of parking maximums 
19.  
Planning Commission Chair Ed Lauing commented the current assignment 
was to endorse or remand the updated Refined NVCAP preferred plan, which 
they had not yet done but at the PTC, they had the 200 Portage/3200 Park 
Study Session, AKA the Fry’s site, so they were looking at a piece of that. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
They did not get the documents, including the DEIR and development 
agreement, in time, so the meeting was to be continued 48 hours from 
current. They took public comment and gave preliminary comments from 
commissioners. Progress had been made since it had been at PTC with the 
Ad Hoc and the Council finding common ground. There had been no vote, 
but in preliminary comments, an initial concern from a number of 
commissioners was the issue of the number-one goal the Council set of 
adding multifamily housing. The version of the proposal that PTC saw in 
March 2021 showed alternative one containing more housing than the 
revised plan. It would be a shame to lose the opportunity to get as much 
housing as possible going forward. They wanted to use this as an 
opportunity for housing.  
Public Comments 
Liz Gardner announced the California Real Estate Association came out with 
a formal apology for redlining and racist policies due to housing and would 
be going back to the year 1900, and thought the Council may have wanted 
to look at it. Regarding the Fry’s site/NVCAP, she asked where else in the 
City was there 15 acres of RM30 property. Being in a housing emergency, 
everything should be done to preserve this RM30 making it elderly, 
multifamily, etc.  
Bob Moss opined there were a few problems with the site, which he outlined, 
that had not been evaluated or discussed much by staff. He suggested the 
entire evaluation be reconsidered and corrected.  
Rebecca Sanders speaking for Penny Brennan, Arthur Keller, John King, and 
Scott Van Duyne thanked the Counsel for turning down the prior staff and 
PTC majority recommendation calling for massive building of new offices in 
Ventura. A representative of Sobrato had told the PTC the Council opted for 
the explosive growth scenario, AKA Alternative 3B, which was false, and she 
would send a letter regarding that. She referenced the Staff Report not 
referencing NVCAP alternatives. She provided information contained on 
Packet Pages 170, 171, 172, 174 and 175. She believed NVCAP was the 
perfect place for housing and phasing out office use and that the proposed 
Sobrato Agreement was not fully explained. She inquired why so much new 
housing would be concentrated in one neighborhood and believed it would 
be helpful if topologies described unit sizes. She was concerned the plan was 
to densify the City and disagreed with removing parking. She addressed 
TDMs being self-reported and unenforceable. She thought Ventura needed 
additional green space and green-canopied streets as shown in the staff 
report. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Jeff Levinsky speaking for Ann Balin, Fred Balin, Hamilton Hitchings, and 
Andie Reed thanked the Council for past efforts in trying to turn North 
Ventura into a pleasant neighborhood not packed with offices and traffic. He 
was worried about the height of new buildings in Ventura. He believed 
adequate parking per unit was important and made housing more affordable. 
Regarding parking, he addressed AB 2097, Section 25863.2(b) of the law, 
and Section 65863.2(c) of the Code, and he was not sure staff planned to 
ensure adequate parking. He suggested other strategies be looked at to 
ensure adequate parking even in the face of AB 2097 and hoped the Legal 
Department would make suggestions and that an unfunded mandate be 
legally fought. He stated we should maintain all current parking standards in 
the event of unavailable projects with insufficient parking and that the 
standards not be lowered.  
Gail Price represented Palo Alto Forward Board and had sent a letter and 
they did not support the endorsement of the NVCAP Refined Preferred 
Alternative, which she specified its inadequacies. She referenced NVCAP 
Alternative 3B being identified by the consultant and staff as the most 
financially feasible, yet that finding was largely dismissed by many members 
of the Working Group and City Council. They were concerned that by not 
seizing the opportunity the City’s Housing Element would be seen as out of 
compliance by the state.  
Angela D. was concerned about housing and park space in the proposal. She 
asked that zoning be enforced to provide housing. She does not think a 
woonerf should be counted as green space. She requested City Council not 
waste the chance to make this a vibrant area of the community.  
Aram James did not think Ed Lauing should have been a guest speaker and 
that other candidates deserved equal time considering it was close to 
election time. He agreed with Gail Price and Angela D.’s comments. He 
thought it was critical that we remember it had been a redlined community 
for years and that much low-income housing and parks were needed. He 
requested we not move forward until there had been more community input 
and that reparations be built into the plan. 
Terry Holzemer, a member of the NVCAP Working Group, was frustrated that 
things were omitted from the Revised NVCAP Proposal. They did not ask for 
additional office development, significant height impacts on existing homes, 
a housing density of 2.5 times what the City allows in other parts of the City, 
or more traffic and parking issues. He hoped the Palo Alto Neighborhood’s 
letter that had been sent would be closely reviewed. He asked how the 
Sobrato Proposal for 200 and 340 Portage impacted the NVCAP plan and 
stated it was not clear nor was it clear how the cannery building would be 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
treated and thought the historic structure needed to be prioritized and made 
part of the plan before the process moved forward.  
Mayor Burt indicated the item would be continued to November 14 but gave 
the Council an opportunity to pose technical questions to staff to be 
addressed on November 14.   
Council Member Filseth wanted to understand what an Enforceable TDM 
meant and wanted staff to comment on the boundaries between Park Street 
and the train tracks and it being a good place to raise height limits.  
Mayor Burt asked staff to estimate, if Alternative 3B were adopted, what job 
creation would occur versus housing impacts and that balance; regarding the 
MTC Transit Oriented Communities, what would be the job generation impact 
throughout the NVCAP area; in reference to the Staff Report referring to the 
MTC’s TOC Proposed Policy, the status of the policy and should Council 
participate in the final formulation of that if not codified; and if we were 
legally allowed to have affordable housing standards favoring greater social 
and economic diversity. 
Council Member DuBois inquired about AB 2097 and EV charging 
requirements.  
Council Member Stone requested the impact on eligibility for the California 
Register of Historical Resources for the proposed demolition of a portion of 
the cannery building and the height of Park Plaza apartment building and 
other buildings on Park and Page Mill Road, and if we adhere to the 
transitional height requirements in the Zoning Code for R1 and multifamily 
the impact it would  have on the capacity of housing units within the NVCAP.  
Vice Mayor Kou inquired about AB 2097 and if there should be an analysis of 
the new law on their return so all points were known and regarding the 
historical aspect of the cannery if affordable housing was there how it would 
affect the historical aspect of the building, the significance of it, what the 
nearby buildings would do to it, and how to get it registered as a historical 
significant project.  
Council Member Cormack questioned slides 13 and 14. She was not clear if 
the 65-foot height for BMR was the same as the 7 stories in height proposed 
for this site and if that was available to the City. She asked regarding 
parking maximums if anyone had ever built above that amount for a 
development in the community and if staff had examples how it had worked 
elsewhere. She did not understand why the City had that.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Mayor Burt declared the item was concluded and would return to the Council 
on November 14 for deliberations and recommendations. He entertained a 
motion to continue the item to November 14.  
MOTION: Council Member Filseth moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to 
continue the item to November 14.  
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Cormack no 
Action: This item was continued to November 14, 2022 
10. 
Review and Provide Direction to Staff on the Draft Permanent Parklet 
Program Standards and Policies; Adopt an Interim Ordinance and 
Resolution to Continue the Pilot Parklet Program and Other On-Street 
Uses During Transition Period; and Direct Staff to Return with 
Legislation Implementing a Permanent Parklet Program 
Planning and Transportation Director Jon Lait remarked that Chief Planning 
Official Amy French would give the presentation for the item. An At-Places 
Memo had been submitted. An attachment was missing in the Staff Report 
concerning the comparable City fees applied in certain jurisdictions for 
similar parklet programs.  
Chief Planning Official French presented slides and sought guidance from 
Council on permanent parklet standards, fees, changes to the Pilot Parklet 
Program, and approval of the Interim Program’s extension. She voiced the 
Permanent Parklet standards would apply to the car-accessible, 25 MPH 
streets, initially University Avenue and intersecting side streets. Direction 
was requested on the Parklet License Fee for right-of-way use. For the 
Interim Program and Permanent Standards, staff proposed Council reinstate 
the Neighbor Consent Requirement, discontinue at-grade dining and parklet 
tents in 2023, and prohibit propane tanks in the standards. Staff requested 
Council approve the Interim Ordinance to extend the Temporary Program 
through June 2023 and then again through the end of 2023, enable at-grade 
uses in the open streets of Ramona and California, and parking lot use for 
dining and retail. What the Pilot Program Parklets provided was expressed. 
Pilot guidelines were not focused on aesthetics and design consistency and 
did not include fees or charges. She gave the legislative history from June 
2020 to late spring each year when there were actions by Council and 
recapped the feedback received from the ARB and City Council on the 
Permanent Program Standards. The proposed standards in front of Council 
included the ARB’s revisions, except for the propane firepits and the fire 
décor, and further provisions. Moving into discussion, she requested focusing 
and providing guidance on parklet standards, location and areas of 
applicability, license fees and schedules, Parklet Neighbor Consent Letter, 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
and other operational and design considerations, such as the propane 
prohibition. She addressed staff’s recommendations of parklet locations, 
fees, and license terms. She discussed the Neighbor Consent Letter and 
complaints received and presented the four main approaches to neighboring 
consent and components to the terms. Information was provided regarding 
propane prohibition, policy for open and vehicular streets, staffing, and 
timelines. The next steps included staff refining the standards and returning 
to Council with an ordinance implementing the Permanent Parklet Program 
and requesting ongoing resources to implement and administer the program. 
Their consideration was enforcement of the permanent standards would 
begin in July 2023. Consultant Hannah Chin-Smith and a number of staff 
from multiple departments that had been part of the Uplift Local Program 
were present.  
Director Lait reiterated what was meant when parklets and streets were 
referenced.  
Public Comments  
Jeff Greenfield, Parks and Recreation Commission Chair, spoke on his own 
behalf and supported the licenses and fees for restaurant use of parklets and 
encouraged City Council to consider licenses and fees for similar uses of 
Planned Community public benefit outdoor spaces.  
Nancy Coupal had written letters to all members of City Council. She 
specified the goals of the Parklet Program, which should be the premiss of 
design and implementation of the program. She urged Council to adopt 
Option 3 in the Packet in regard to neighbor consent.  
Megan Kawkab opined it was not fair charging folks who had financed a 
parklet while letting people have closed streets and not pay; however, she 
was in favor of eventually paying for the space. Business owners should be 
involved in the process due to the rents. She was undecided regarding 
letters of consent from neighbors but thought they may have to be 
considered.  
John Shenk hoped the Council would review an email he submitted earlier. 
He indicated that proceeding with the Parklet Program was not best and that 
a reimagined downtown needed to be considered with policing, cleanliness, 
and infrastructure. He suggested revisiting the zoning ordinance to be more 
inclusive of retailers. Visibility of retailers was referenced.  
Mayor Burt inquired how the series of staff requests should be organized. 
Clearer nomenclature of open street was needed.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Director Lait specified the slide deck summarized the items they were 
considering, which included guidelines and standards, application and license 
fees and terms, location, the Neighbor Consent Letter, propane, tents, and 
the Interim Ordinance extension. He explained why the term open streets 
was used but would add open-to-pedestrian streets.  
Council Member DuBois inquired if the permanent parking ordinance applied 
to the pedestrian portion of Ramona and not the pedestrian portion of 
California and if Council was to give advice only on dining on grade for the 
parklet portion. He questioned if Slide 3 indicated a parklet would be 
required in 2023 and if open-to-pedestrian streets meant no at-grade dining.  
Director Lait clarified the Council was not taking action and that they were 
seeking guidance on the permanent program and as it would apply with 
streets to vehicular access and the open-to-pedestrian streets portion of 
Ramona Avenue, not the pedestrian portion of California. There was an 
alternatives analysis study in progress for California Avenue. The at-grade 
dining of the pedestrian area of Ramona Avenue was scheduled to extend 
through the end of 2023. He clarified that Slide 3 indicated at-grade dining 
would end after 2022, and the open-to-pedestrian streets on California 
Avenue and Ramona would have continued dining at-grade without having to 
have a parklet construction; no longer allowed in 2023 for the vehicular 
streets.  
Mayor Burt voiced that where cars were allowed dining would not be allowed 
at street grade. There were two meanings of at grade – sidewalk versus 
street grade – and requested those terms be used for clarification.  
Council Member DuBois questioned why tables would not be on the street; if 
tents and umbrellas would be allowed on open streets; in the Interim 
Ordinance if tents of any size would continue to be allowed and if tents 
would be allowed in private parking lots away from Ramona and California 
Avenue; if Council had addressed consent being required starting January 1; 
if Council was addressing the open-streets program; if decisions were 
needed in terms of neighbor consent; and estimated cleaning frequency and 
costs.  
Director Lait replied there was a safety concern and an aesthetic component. 
Tents and umbrellas were allowed on streets open to pedestrians but not 
streets open to vehicular traffic. In the Interim Ordinance, tents would not 
continue in parking lots but dining in the parking lots would continue through 
2023. Going forward, they would propose tents not be allowed in private 
parking lots away from Ramona and California Avenue, as Council had given 
direction of no tents; however, it was a policy call. Consent being required 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 20 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
starting January 1 was before Council, and staff recommended reinstating 
the Neighbor Consent document throughout the City were parklets would be 
allowed. There was overlap of the open-streets program, but not for Cal. 
Ave., with the exception of the Neighbor Consent Provision extending to 
open streets and streets open to vehicles. Neighbor consent was before the 
Council.  
Public Works Engineering Senior Engineer Mike Nafziger would have to 
research the frequency of cleaning. The costs were about $220,000 annually 
for University and Cal. Ave.  
Council Member Cormack inquired if staff was proposing changes in the 
Interim Ordinance and Resolution. She was comfortable with the parklet 
standards. She supported the ban on propane in the parklets. Parklet fees 
looked straightforward, and there could be discussions of cleaning fees, etc. 
The parklet license fee was comparable to other jurisdictions. She requested 
the meaning of the heat-map colors on Slide 13. She supported Option 2 for 
the Neighbor Consent Letter and explained why. In terms of operational 
design considerations, she asked why at-grade was adjusted from a 36- to 
38-inch level and remarked the clear, hard sidewalls was a good 
recommendation.  
Director Lait responded they were requesting a change in the Neighbor 
Consent component of the Interim Ordinance and Resolution and they were 
specifying no tents would be allowed in the areas with vehicle access. The 
heat-map colors on Slide 13 were visual aids.  
Assistant City Attorney Tim Shimizu clarified the Neighbor Consent, tent, and 
propane rules were staff-level regulation changes, so the recommendation 
from Council would direct staff to make certain changes to staff-level 
regulations. There would be no change to the Ordinance and Resolution from 
previous versions except changing the sunset date. Current permits for 
parklets and at-grade uses would expire December 31, 2022, so rule 
changes would be implemented upon renewal of permits or to another date 
Council specified.  
Consultant Chin-Smith stated in terms of operational design the ARB 
suggested adding a 2-inch flexibility for at-grade changes.  
Council Member Stone asked for an estimate of the average cost to a 
business owner constructing a permanent parklet and asked regarding 
requiring neighboring businesses concerns distinguishing between open-to-
pedestrian streets and open-to-traffic streets; that businesses were 
concerned with not having vehicular traffic and drivers being able to see 
storefronts. He understood the consent rule for streets open to vehicular 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 21 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
traffic but believed there was less need for Ramona Street and possibly later 
California where there were no cars. He was not interested in the City losing 
possible parking on streets open to vehicles. He was interested in a 
distinction between open and closed streets. If the consent agreement was 
required and lasted 12 months, the consent should be honored if a business 
changed hands. Being this was public property, decisions should be made 
based on providing the greatest utility for the public and not the wants of 
individual businesses; however, businesses should be given the right of 
refusal for parklet space located outside their business. He requested 
clarification of Slide 18 regarding propane and questioned the cost efficiency 
of electric heaters and if the existing infrastructure could handle increased 
demand. He supported banning propane but had concerns with respect to 
parklets being usable year-round with the heating issue.  
Assistant Director of Public Works Holly Boyd estimated the average cost of 
constructing a permanent parklet having a platform, sides, barriers, etc., 
was $20,000 to $35,000.  
City Manager Ed Shikada indicated that in general neighboring businesses 
had no concerns distinguishing between open-to-pedestrian streets and 
open-to-traffic streets. Staff’s recommendation was for it to be applied 
initially to University Avenue where vehicles existed and to the section of 
Ramona that was closed to vehicles and would follow up with a similar 
proposal for Cal. Ave., once the specifics were clarified as Cal. Ave., had at-
grade uses extending beyond parking spaces and was how permits were 
being used.   
Director Lait explained that propane was currently allowed for the interim 
standards and a change would not be proposed, but prohibiting propane was 
proposed for the permanent standards and would apply to open and 
vehicular streets. Regarding electric demand, service panel upgrades were 
likely, and there would be expense in obtaining permits and installing 
electric heaters.  
Council Member Tanaka asked if the Economic Development Study Session 
scheduled for November 7 should be used to help inform some of the 
decisions being discussed. He requested the cleaning schedule and asked if 
the City had gotten feedback as for the cleanliness and wondered whose 
responsibility it should be and if penalties should be imposed. Parklets 
covering businesses’ signage should not be allowed. He asked if staff had 
given thought to businesses sharing parklets. 
Director Lait replied the Economic Development Study Session may not 
preclude the opportunity for discussing the parklets but he did not know if it 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 22 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
was a binary operation and maybe both could be done and they could inform 
each other, but he was seeking guidance at this meeting. He was not aware 
of a solution to businesses sharing parklets but welcomed staff’s comments. 
There had been complaints of access or perceived visibility to adjacent 
tenants. They were hopeful restaurant operations and adjacent tenants 
would come to an agreement without having the City mediate.  
Senior Engineer Mike Nafziger would provide the cleaning schedule 
information at a later time. There had been some feedback regarding 
cleanliness, and they were trying to determine the right frequency to take 
care of those issues. There was a provision in the report to subsidize the 
cleaning or it being in the annual permit fee.  
Council Member Filseth inquired if under the staff recommendation propane 
use would be allowed anywhere. Regarding parklets extending to a 
neighbor’s property, consent was the best way to address it. Concerning 
consent, he wondered if consideration should be given to timelines once an 
agreement regarding consent was revoked. He did not want the City 
spending time mediating businesses adjacent to each other.  
Director Lait’s understanding was propane would not be allowed in the 
permanent program, but Council could revisit the issue.  
Vice Mayor Kou asked who would be responsible for parklet property should 
it be damaged by first responders when responding to an emergency.  
Director Lait did not believe there would be liability to the City if a parklet 
was damaged in response to an emergency. However, if responders were 
negligent and damaged a parklet not engaged in an emergency, he imagined 
the City would have some liability. Fire aside, there were provisions 
imbedded in the terms that in the event of a Public Works matter as much 
notice as possible would be given, but in the event of an immediate 
emergency, first responders would have access to the parklet.  
City Attorney Molly Stump commented first priority was always addressing 
emergency, safety, and medical situations as expeditiously as possible. The 
City had a claims process if someone felt the City had damaged their 
property.  
Mayor Burt’s biggest concern was safety and questioned what standards, 
other than elevation, there were preventing cars from entering a parklet. 
There were competing interests of businesses adjacent to parklets, the 
proprietors using the parklets, and the City. The City owned the sidewalks 
and streets, but certain rights were implicit and there were some gray areas 
in terms of visibility, etc., that would impede the ability to do business. He 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 23 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
inquired if that was generally the position. What was being considered was 
the reasonable rights of a business owner to attract a tenant, a tenant 
maybe being unwilling to lease if visibility was blocked, and the rights of a 
tenant to have storefront visibility to some degree. There were two 
circumstances, one on streets with vehicles and one like Ramona being a 
little different. He spoke of roof structures being likely to impede visibility 
and parking in front of a particular store and wondered if Council should be 
looking at possibly disallowing roofed parklets in front of an adjacent 
business but allowing tables for dining and the City having a fee structure for 
parklets with only tables versus a structure with walls, etc. He inquired how 
many sides of a structure would allow plexiglass; if other cities had 
experienced fires as a result of propane; if staff had a greenhouse gas 
comparison of propane versus methane of an outdoor space heater; and 
considering hardships and problems with electrical panel upgrades and 
transformer issues, should propane be prohibited entirely, which would 
eliminate outdoor dining year-round, and should it be eliminated before 
businesses are given ample time to transition to electric. Propane heaters 
had been in the City for a long time, and he did not know what changed 
causing them to be prohibited. The hardship issue and transition time was 
raised nine months ago, and he had not seen additional analysis or data, yet 
permanent decisions were being moved forward without understanding the 
impacts, which was concerning.   
Director Lait responded safety was a concern for staff and the chief building 
official was aware of those issues. He referenced Packet Page 207 containing 
regulations regarding barriers. Three sides would allow plexiglass. As for a 
greenhouse gas comparison of propane versus methane, folks engaged in 
S/CAP had done that analysis, but he would have to look at it.  
Consultant Chin-Smith noted regarding safety that there were a number of 
traffic safety elements in the parklet design, which she listed.  
City Attorney Stump indicated regarding implicit rights and gray areas in 
terms of visibility the courts recognized not completely denying ingress or 
egress, which was not the issue here.  
Interim Fire Marshall Scott Woodfin stated there had been no propane 
incidents in the City. The issue had been brought up at the County Fire 
Marshall’s meeting, and some had damage when material was close to the 
propane but no fires as it had been caught ahead of time.  
Council Member DuBois felt Council needed alignment on the goal of a 
parklet and if it was meant to be all-weather indoor dining or outdoor dining 
in nice weather. Maybe it should be built into the pricing whether it would be 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 24 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
dining in good weather versus the creation of all-weather structures. He 
thought we should move toward lower cost parklets. Regarding the City 
owning the streets and who would make the leasing decisions was a 
question of vested interest of private business versus City interest. As for 
consent, there would be situations where there was no consent and coercion 
between businesses may be created, which would be time consuming for the 
City to arbitrate. The City should be the landlord and manage the property 
and make clear rules. Even with consent, there were questions as to who 
would get first rights on a property, etc. It was too simplistic to say leasing 
in front of another building was allowed with consent. He was concerned 
about amplified sound and rights of neighbors, and allowing amplified music 
should not be on the parklet itself but instead coming from the building. He 
wanted Ramona to be treated as an historic district. He discussed rates for 
parklets, and the tables staff had provided seemed to be the right amounts, 
but market value needed to be determined. If this was going to be done, 
rent needed to be required for public spaces used by other restaurants not 
currently being charged. He addressed parking demand, losing a spot, and 
generating more usage, and the spots needed to be valued for a reasonable 
market rent.  
Council Member Tanaka questioned how the building code requirements 
were applied to outdoor space as far as number of bathrooms, etc. As far as 
fair-weather usage, he was concerned how the parklets would be assembled 
and disassembled seasonally. He asked how rent compared for outdoor 
space versus interior space. He wondered if the outdoor space needed to be 
something more planned, like Santa Monica, and not a tent here and there 
but built space. Some retailers could use outdoor space, and there were 
possible use cases, which should not preclude a retailer from using it. With 
proper safety inspections, propane should be allowed given the low level of 
incidents.  
Director Lait indicated compliance with building code was an area being 
analyzed and would be done on a case-by-case basis for restaurants. 
Regarding concerns of incremental or piecemeal solutions, he reminded the 
Council that work had been initiated on University Avenue of more 
comprehensive approach, but the timeline was challenging in comparison to 
the timeline here for permanent parklet guidelines. If the Council wanted to 
pursue a more comprehensive approach, it would likely involve putting the 
permanent parklet guidelines on hold until the University-specific work was 
completed. There was also Cal. Ave., specific work underway.  
Assistant to the City Manager Steve Guagliardo stated regarding rent 
comparisons, Slide 13 compared ground lease, which was meant to show the 
cost of indoor space in the corresponding corridor.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 25 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to see a comprehensive approach 
accelerated, so there was less uncertainty and having something planned 
and elegant.  
Mayor Burt requested a range of the sales tax revenue resulting from 
additional outdoor dining.  
City Manager Shikada responded there was no quantification or range of tax 
revenue. He had heard, even contemplating the cost, that it was at the 
break even, so one could imagine what it take for it to break even 
commensurate sales tax receipts.  
Mayor Burt recommended we better understand that because there was a 
second revenue stream with charges for the spaces, not just the rental 
revenue but the incremental increase in sales taxes. Regarding parklets 
being year-round or seasonal, there were a number of establishments with 
essentially permanent parklets, and he wanted to know how Council felt 
about those. He wondered why there would be objections to being year-
round, which added to the social experience, tax revenue, and rental rates. 
He questioned if they were seasonal what would happen to staffing. He did 
not know where Council was moving forward on concrete actions. 
City Manager Shikada suggested extending the interim ordinances and 
allowing additional time. 
Mayor Burt declared certainty needed to be provided to businesses in terms 
of the timeline being extended to implement the permanent ordinance, and 
Council needed to know how much time was needed to determine 
permanent standards.  
Council Member DuBois stated the interim ordinances may have needed to 
be extended considering the University and Cal. Ave., street redesign 
projects were in progress.  
City Manager Shikada was not prepared to speak to timelines but would 
make it a priority. Feedback and/or approval of the design standards may 
have provided some certainty.  
Director Lait believed it could have been years for University and Cal. Ave., 
streetscape concept implementation. Cleaning up the program now had 
value. Guidance from the Council on Attachment A, the guidelines, would 
have been imminently helpful and was the predictability that needed to be 
communicated to the property owners and tenants. Components related to 
propane, the Consent Letter, and pricing were policy decisions that could be 
worked out on return to Council in December. A longer rollout time, if 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 26 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
needed, could be discussed. They could come back to Council with some 
sales tax data and a more refined recommendation on costs and fees as well 
as finalizing propane, etc. Staff had been thinking about year-round 
parklets, not seasonal and was embedded in the standards.  
Council Member Cormack concurred with the year-round approach. She 
touched on why parklets may not have been additive in terms of space and 
sales tax. She was prepared to adopt the Interim Ordinance and time being 
extended. In terms of Neighbor Consent, she was not convinced the 
restaurants would be interested in a year-round parklet without a roof.  
ORIGINAL MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by 
Council Member Filseth to:  
Adopt the interim ordinance and resolution currently set to expire on 
December 31, 2022, to extend the temporary parklet program to June 30, 
2023, and allow the other on-street and parking lot dining and retail 
programs to December 31, 2023. Direct staff to continue allowing dining at 
street grade until June 30, 2023 
a) Direct staff to implement Option 2 of the Neighbor Consent Letter 
through administrative regulations to begin on January 1, 2023. 
Council Member Cormack thought this motion would give people more time 
to use what they had already invested in and resolve the problem.  
Council Member Filseth voiced that the Interim Ordinance needed to be 
extended since there was not a replacement. None of the options of consent 
were perfect. As for visibility, a consent mechanism was needed unless a 
parklet was banned from somebody else’s property. In regard to space 
heaters, he wanted to know if the alternative was practical and the impact of 
CO2. He thought Council Member DuBois’ suggestion regarding fees was 
reasonable.  
Vice Mayor Kou asked if license fees would be collected with the Interim 
Ordinance and when fees would be implemented. 
Director Lait declared this action simply extended the interim standards for 
parklets through June and the other provisions through December. A motion 
on Attachment A was important, and Council’s direction regarding fees and 
propane would allow them to return with refined options in December. It was 
likely fees would be implemented before June 30, 2023.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 27 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Council Member Tanaka questioned if a master plan could be accelerated 
and requested staff focus on it. He did not like any of the options and asked 
that it be split out in the motion.  
Director Lait noted changes to infrastructure would take years but he hoped 
with acceleration and engagement from the businesses we could move 
relatively quickly, for example with University Avenue, with decision-making 
of the concept the Public Works project would implement. As far as 
accelerating the master plan, they were entering the engagement phase 
with the public.  
Council Member Stone supported the Interim Ordinance but not the Consent 
Letter. He proposed a friendly amendment for provision of right of first 
refusal allowing a business owner first right to place a parklet, and if they 
chose not to, then the owner could not object to someone else putting a 
parklet in front of the property.  
Council Member Cormack asked how staff would interpret a right of first 
refusal. 
Director Lait was focused administratively on how verification of an offer 
would be made without the City being involved in the process.  
Council Member Filseth did not accept the friendly amendment. 
Council Member Cormack did not accept the friendly amendment as the 
problem would be one feeling forced to invest in a parklet as a defensive 
measure.  
Council Member Stone offered it as an unfriendly.  
Mayor Burt was interested in coupling something similar and if there were 
two adjacent dining establishments a business would have first right in front 
of their establishment and if they did not want it, the space could be rented. 
For adjacent non-dining establishments, he was interested in allowing dining 
provided there was no covering. He referenced possible differing fees of each 
option. He asked for clarification of the Neighbor Consent Letter and prior 
policy referencing neighboring businesses, not neighboring property owner. 
Director Lait declared the current proposal was tenant and property owner.  
Assistant to the City Manager Guagliardo stated Clause B referred to a 
neighboring business being food and beverage and questioned if it would 
also include a neighboring retail establishment. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 28 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Mayor Burt confirmed it would include a neighboring business whether it was 
a dining establishment.  
Discussion ensued regarding the right of refusal and allowing a space to be 
rented but not used and if it was substantively different than asking for 
consent. It was decided if space was rented it had to be actively used with 
an above-grade structure once the Permanent Ordinance was in effect. 
Regarding timing and first opportunity, administrative details would be 
presented at a later date. Timing of elimination of at-grade dining was 
discussed, and it was decided to leave it in the Original Motion as it was but 
correcting it at a later time.  
SUBSTITUTE MOTION: Council Member Stone moved, seconded by Mayor 
Burt to substitute as follows as sub-bullets to the above motion:  
a) That parklets be allowed without coverings or obstructions above 38” 
for a fee, to be determined, in front of neighboring businesses  
b) Allow for a first right of refusal for renting a parklet space, with the 
first right to go to the business immediately behind the parklet space 
Council Member DuBois expressed when rents should start and explained the 
right of first refusal and thought the space should not have to be actively 
used.  
Discussion ensued regarding rents, active use of space, parking spaces, 
enhancing the experience and the best use of public space. 
Council Member Filseth was against the Substitute Motion. In reference to 
administrative details and unintended consequences, the City should not be 
involved in deciding one business being able to use space in front of another 
business.  
Council Member Tanaka supported the Main Motion. He suggested staff put 
together the grand plan ASAP.  
Vice Mayor Kou supported the Substitute Motion. She considered the first 
right of refusal forcing neighbors to rent a parklet space or lose it. She felt a 
parklet was enhancing for a restaurant business. In trying to have a good 
mix of businesses, she wondered if property owners would have trouble 
renting out space. The best utility for the space was parking.  
Council Member Cormack noted the Substitute Motion did not address the 
existing problems and may have created new ones.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 29 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
SUBSTITUTE MOTION FAILED: 2-5, Tanaka, Kou, Cormack, Filseth, 
DuBois no 
MOTION SPLIT FOR PURPOSE OF VOTING  
MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to adopt the interim ordinance and resolution currently set to expire 
on December 31, 2022, to extend the temporary parklet program to June 
30, 2023, and allow the other on-street and parking lot dining and retail 
programs to December 31, 2023. Direct staff to continue allowing dining at 
street grade until June 30, 2023 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member 
Filseth to add as a sub-bullet to the above motion:  
a) Direct staff to implement Option 2 of the Neighbor Consent Letter 
through administrative regulations to begin on January 1, 2023. 
MOTION PASSED: 4-3, Burt, Tanaka, Stone no  
ORIGINAL MOTION: Council Member Dubois moved, seconded by Vice 
Mayor Kou to:  
1. Direct staff to implement proposed permanent standards upon adoption of 
a permanent parklet ordinance  
2. As to the permanent parklet program, direct staff to: 
a. Return to Council establishing an application fee, cleaning fee, and 
security deposit based on cost recovery.  
b. Return to Council establishing and annual license fees as soon as 
possible, set to 70% of ground retail rate for "downtown" and "not 
downtown" in Table 2 
c. Require Consent Letter from both neighboring tenant and owner 
d. Limit amplified sound to come only from buildings 
Council Member DuBois referenced Packet Page 194 regarding propane and 
commented it should be kept in the permanent program. 
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 30 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Council Member Tanaka did not agree with banning propane. Due to the late 
hour, he made a Substitute Motion to adjourn, which failed due to lack of a 
second.  
Council Member Cormack supported Item 1 but not 2B. She inquired if other 
jurisdictions were requiring security deposits, how deposits would be 
refunded, how staff would interpret changing 2D, and if the standards as 
written would reduce the likelihood of spillover noise at a sufficient level. 
She appreciated the cleaning fee. She was interested in 2B being at a rate of 
40%. 
Director Lait commented that security deposits varied from jurisdiction to 
jurisdiction. The process of deposit refunds was explained. As for 2D, there 
would not be speakers within the parklet area, and staff questioned if 
speakers would be allowed on the exterior of a building. The standards 
stated compliance with the Noise Ordinance. There was the possibility of 
complaints and enforcement challenges.  
Council Member DuBois proposed staff make a recommendation regarding 
amplified sound.  
City Manager Shikada provided information contained in the Municipal Fee 
Schedule.  
Discussion ensued regarding license and parking fees, which Chief 
Transportation Official Philip Kamhi would research parking fee information.  
Vice Mayor Kou inquired if the City had someone who could measure noise.  
City Manager Shikada remarked the Police Department had equipment and 
training to measure noise.  
AMENDMENT: Council Member Tanaka, seconded by Mayor Burt to direct 
staff to return with a recommendation for continuing propane use pending a 
phase out based on practical feasibility for restaurants 
Discussion ensued regarding propane use.  
AMENDMENT PASSED: 4-3, Cormack, Kou, DuBois no 
Mayor Burt returning to the Main Motion was concerned with 2B, which 
prompted discussion. He requested confirmation of the three columns in 
refence to averages of percentages. He would support a rate closer to 30% 
ground retail rate for “downtown.” He did not know what to do with “not 
downtown,” in the motion as it appeared miscalculated.  
DRAFT ACTION MINUTES 
 
 
Page 31 of 31 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Draft Summary Minutes:  10/24/2022 
Assistant to the City Manager Steve Guagliardo would come back to the 
Council with clarification of information in the three columns Mayor Burt 
referenced.  
Discussion ensued regarding annual license fees, and it was decided Part B 
of the motion would be modified to reflect staff returning to Council 
establishing an annual license fee as soon as possible. 
Council Member Stone questioned if 2C would include the ability for 
neighboring consent to be revoked at any time. 
Director Lait specified staff had recommended it be revokable but not 
immediately revokable.  
MOTION INCORPORATING AMENDMENT: Council Member Dubois 
moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Kou to:  
1. Direct staff to implement proposed permanent standards upon adopting of 
a permanent parklet ordinance  
a. Direct staff to return with a recommendation for continuing propane 
use pending a phase out based on practical feasibility for restaurants 
2. As to the permanent parklet program, direct staff to: 
a. Return to Council establishing an application fee, cleaning fee and 
security deposit based on cost recovery.  
b. Return to Council establishing an annual license fees as soon as 
possible. 
c. Require Consent letter from both neighboring tenant and owner. Upon 
revocation, owner has a minimum of six months before they are 
required to remove the parklet.  
d. Limit Amplified sound to come only from buildings. 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1 Tanaka no 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
None. 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 12:31 A.M.  
