CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
Page 1 of 19 
Special Meeting 
 
October 17, 2022 
The City Council of the City of Palo Alto met on this date in the Council 
Chambers and by virtual teleconference at 5:00 P.M. 
Present In Person:  
Burt, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Present Remotely:  
Cormack  
Absent: 
 
 
None 
 
Special Orders of the Day 
1. Cybersecurity Awareness Month Proclamation 
Information Technology Director Darren Numoto explained Cybersecurity 
Awareness Month. Tips included thinking before clicking links in emails and 
text messages, updating software, using strong passwords, enabling 
multifactor authentication, and not giving out personal information. 
Information is available at CISA.gov and staysafeonline.org. 
ACTION: Proclamation Issued  
Study Session 
2. 3400 El CAMINO REAL [22PLN-00227]: Request for Prescreening of the 
Applicant's Proposal to Rezone the Subject Site from Various Zoning 
Districts to Planned Housing Zone (PHZ) to Allow Construction of 382 
Residential Rental Units (44 studios, 243 one-bedroom, 86 two-bedroom 
and 9 three-bedroom units) in two Buildings. Environmental Assessment: 
Not a Project. Zoning District: CS, CS(H), RM-20 (Service Commercial, 
Hotel, Multi-Family Residential). 
Planning & Development Services Director Jonathan Lait stated there would 
be no formal action at the current meeting. The applicant will be given the 
opportunity to present to the Council and it will be determined whether or 
not they can proceed. 
Planning & Development Services Planner Garrett Sauls presented a project 
overview. The project deviates from the code in terms of a height increase, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 2 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
increased floor area ratio (FAR), waiver from impact fees, and a request for 
a zero-foot build-to line on El Camino Real. The applicant proposes to 
proceed with Option 1 for meeting the 20-percent affordable unit ratio 
requirement, provide 382 rental units, retain 4000 ft2 of retail space, and 
redesign the area where Matadero Creek is currently located to provide a 
meandering path for the public. If a formal application is filed, Staff would 
need to evaluate impact on the creek, impact of added vehicles on El Camino 
and Matadero Avenue, impact on the environment including California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) analysis, architectural elements including 
massing and privacy of adjacent properties, and financial considerations 
related to loss of Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) for retail space. Staff 
recommended conducting a study session on the prescreening application 
and providing comments to the applicant. 
Staff answered questions from Mayor Patrick Burt. There are 136 hotel 
rooms at Creekside. The estimated TOT revenue loss would be $300,000 to 
$1.3M. Existing square footage of retail is 8,735 ft2. For workforce housing, 
the area median income (AMI) for a 1-bedroom is 5 percent at every level: 
very low income, low income, moderate, and above moderate. For a 2-
person household, the income is $67,400 for very low income, $105,400 for 
low income, and $161,750 for moderate income. 
Council Member Tom DuBois asked about the frequency of bus service in 
that area. Director Lait said bus service meets the 15-minute headway 
standard for morning and evening peak times. 
Council Member Greer Stone asked what the setback is for creeks. Staff 
responded construction within 20 feet of the creek bank is prohibited. There 
can be an exception if geotechnical analysis determines stability of the slope 
without reinforcement. 
Vice Mayor Lydia Kou asked if the applicant has indicated how many 
bedrooms are in each of the below market rate (BMR) units. Planner Sauls 
said the BMR program requires they be a representative mix of size and unit 
types. Retail space would be in Building A along El Camino Real. 
Mayor Burt invited the applicant to speak. 
The applicant stated items needing to be studied before moving the project 
forward in a formal application include public works, the creek, emergency 
response, transportation, utilities, GreenWaste, environmental studies, 
trees, and traffic and they would need to go through the Architectural 
Review Board. They need to determine building heights and setbacks and 
project feasibility. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 3 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
Public Comment 
1. 
Winter Dellenbach spoke on behalf of Gerry Masteller, Mary 
Sylvester, Fred Balin, and Andie Reed. A housing proposal for the 
Creekside property is welcomed but the current proposal is not 
appropriate. She voiced safety concerns along the safe biking route 
along Matadero should the development be built. Either the proposed 
entrance on Matadero or the safe biking route should be removed. 
Parking on the streets would increase and residential preferential 
parking (RPP) would be needed in the Barron Park and Ventura 
neighborhoods. Developers should not gain parking fees when a 20-
percent inclusionary set-aside is part of the swap to be granted a 
lucrative PHZ zone change. Ms. Dellenbach highlighted the incursions 
to the creek by the proposed development. A new tree ordinance 
may determine what trees could be removed and what they would be 
replaced with. The Driftwood Market move should be subsidized by 
the developer. 
 
2. 
Stephen Levy said the Planned Housing Zone (PHZ) has succeeded in 
bringing forth 4 proposals that respond directly to HCD’s request that 
sites have proof of interest. He asked the Council to give positive 
feedback to the prescreening. The project brings benefits in terms of 
number of units and location with access to jobs, shopping, services, 
amenities, and transit. 
 
3. 
John King, president of the Barron Park Association, said the 
community supports and looks forward to the addition of new 
housing but the proposed project does not seem feasible. It is out of 
scale and would present density-related environmental and traffic 
problems. There are concerns about a 2-level parking structure being 
built next to Matadero creek. The EIR should look into transportation 
and sewer capacity analysis as well as arborist, wildlife, historic 
report, geotech, etc. Driftwood Market is important for the 
neighborhood and there is concern about its preservation. There are 
concerns about lost TOT, the Matadero safe route to school, parking 
along Matadero Avenue, and open spaces to play in the proposed 
complex. 
 
4. 
Kelly Stafford, a 4th generation Palo Alto resident who resides 2 
blocks down from Creekside Inn on Matadero, spoke on behalf of 
Rebecca Sanders, Leigh Cambra, and Stephanie Enos. She stated 
there is a need for 2 and 3-bedroom homes instead of studios and 1-
bedroom units to attract families to stay in the community. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 4 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
Affordable housing is needed to keep people in the area where they 
work. 
 
5. 
Arthur Liberman, Barron Park resident, welcomed housing along El 
Camino but said it must serve the needs of the City such as 
workforce housing and affordable housing. The Council should 
commission a coordinated area plan. Redevelopment is needed in the 
area. He said coherence, foresight, and planning are needed by the 
City. 
 
6. 
Liz Gardner was thrilled for an initial plan for rental housing. She said 
the 20-percent BMR housing is doable but she would like to see 
sustainable integration like EV charging stations and solar. She asked 
why there were so few 3-bedroom units and so many 1-bedroom 
units. Interior amenities are lacking. The Driftwood Deli could be 
integrated into the overall design. She encouraged having an 
integrated community. 
 
7. 
Bill Ross said the Driftwood Market is critical to the Council’s 
evaluation of the project. He voiced concern over mitigation of the 
Stanford toxic plume. The evacuation routes under SB 99 need to be 
further delineated. There needs to be an undergrounding of utilities 
associated with the project. Policy implications of replacing existing 
profitable retail and the hotel with housing should be considered. The 
creek analysis will involve a stream alteration permit from the 
Department of Fish and Conservation and environmental analysis 
needs to be extensive. 
 
8. 
Tanya Gupta voiced strong opposition to the prescreening request. 
The location is not suitable for a project of this magnitude and it 
would disrupt the character of the quiet community. She emphasized 
that the proposal has extensive opposition from the residents of 
Barron Park. Matadero Avenue needs to remain a safe route to 
school. The elimination of Driftwood and Creekside would be a true 
loss in an area lacking in retail. The proposed massive apartment 
complex would deteriorate the qualities that make Barron Park 
beloved. 
 
9. 
Erica Valentine of Local 393 whose 3,100 members live in Santa 
Clara and San Benito Counties voiced excitement about the project 
but asked the developer to consider using a local skilled and trained 
workforce and ensure the construction project utilizes responsible 
construction methods. 
 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 5 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
10. Amie Ashton spoke on behalf of Palo Alto Forward. The proposed site 
is already designated as a major site for housing within the Housing 
Element with proximity to jobs, retail, services, transit, and bike 
routes. The proposal exceeds the retail space requirement allowing 
for potential occupation by Driftwood Market or other retail uses. She 
urged the Council to provide feedback to the applicant and allow the 
project to proceed to the formal application stage. 
 
11. Cedric Pitot de La Beaujardiere, resident of Barron Park, supported 
additional housing but said the project is too large for the site. He 
estimated the project would increase the population of Barron Park 
by 15 to 30 percent. Traffic would further back up at the stoplight at 
Matadero Avenue. He questioned how the developer would fit 260 
trees on the site. The City should be clear on the requirements for 
planting trees. The upstream portions of Matadero Creek should be 
protected. Losing Driftwood Deli would be a big loss to the 
neighborhood. 
 
12. Jonas Stafford, a long-time resident, said smaller projects are more 
in line with the community but are not moving forward. He suggested 
the Council revisit their decision from 2020 regarding planning and 
zoning for family neighborhoods and then turn down the current 
proposed project. 
 
13. Christine Stafford grew up in Barron Park and still resides there. 
Home prices are out of reach for most people working in the area. 
Low-income housing is needed. Only one project has taken 
advantage of the Affordable Housing Zone approved in 2018. The 
project ignores the 20-foot setback from the street which the City 
enforced for her garage expansion. 
 
14. Mircea of 572 Chimalus lives behind the fence of Creekside Inn. He 
voiced support for affordable housing but was strongly opposed to 
the project because of the size, height, and number of units. He said 
Building B should be a park, an open space. Fee reduction should not 
be allowed. A 1-acre park should be donated to the City. 
 
15. Bob Moss did not object to housing along El Camino but stated the 
developer is ignoring existing zoning, neighborhood compatibility, 
traffic, and parking. He asked that the project not be approved. A 2-
level underground garage is impractical for the 14 to 16-foot aquifer. 
The project violates the density, the 50-foot height limit, the 35-foot 
height limit along El Camino, FAR, and units per acre. A project is 
needed that complies with the Comprehensive Plan, the zoning, and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 6 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
the El Camino design guidelines. This project is ½ mile away from El 
Camino and Page Mill, the most congested intersection in Palo Alto. 
This project should be scaled back and meet the comprehensive plan 
of the zoning ordinance. 
Mayor Burt invited the applicant to respond. 
The applicant stated this is a process where the constructive ideation and 
criticism is used to make the proposal better and they look forward to the 
Council’s questions and answers. 
Mayor Burt said there would be no motions. Council members were invited 
to share their thoughts and ask questions. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked for a definition of workforce. Director Lait said 
workforce housing is defined in the Workforce Housing Overlay as being at 
140 and up to 150 percent of the AMI. Workforce is also mentioned in the 
guiding document for Planned Home Zoning and defined as above. Vice 
Mayor Kou asked for a definition of the income level for the 140 to 150 
percent AMI. Director Lait said approximately $188,720 is 140 percent AMI 
for a household of 2. Vice Mayor Kou said this is not reachable for janitors, 
electricians, gardeners, and some teachers. Vice Mayor Kou would not 
compare the development to Wilton Court. For the developer to ask for 
waivers is unconscionable. Driftwood Market and Cibo are longtime 
businesses in Barron Park and good neighbors. There was very little regard 
for youth in land use and planning. She suggested insisting on more park 
and open space. Parking along both sides of Matadero would cause 
congestion as the road is so narrow. She agreed with the public comment 
about SB 99 being important for emergency vehicle access. 
Mayor Burt would not consider waiving impact fees for a market rate housing 
project or commercial project as these fees are necessary to invest in 
infrastructure of parks and public facilities necessary to support increases in 
population. Resources are not available to lose the hotel tax as well as 
subsidize market-rate developers. Mayor Burt voiced concerned over 
significant increases in the FAR and not considering increased creek 
setbacks. 
Council Member Stone asked Staff about the impact of tree removal with the 
project. Staff replied the impact is unknown at this time. Council Member 
Stone asked about a construction timeline and its impact to Driftwood 
having to vacate. Planner Sauls said larger projects take at least 2 years. 
Council Member Stone said it was unrealistic Driftwood Deli would survive a 
2-year hiatus and it would be a big loss to the community. Council Member 
Stone asked the anticipated cost of the market rate units. Staff replied they 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 7 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
did not have that yet. Council Member Stone asked if an RPP could be done 
that excluded particular projects. City Attorney Molly Stump replied former 
Attorney General Harris issued an opinion that it was not appropriate for 
multi-family housing developments to be excluded from an RPP available to 
single-family homes. There is broad discretion for local councils to decide 
where to draw the lines of an RPP which would determine who is eligible to 
receiving parking permits. Council Member Stone asked if there were other 
amenities besides the swimming pool. Staff said a gym was proposed. 
Council Member Cormack said the suggestions in Gail Price’s email were 
reasonable and there was space for something to work in the location.  This 
project represents a new community, not just a new building and amenities 
are a good consideration. She would like to know the dwelling units per acre 
in the buildable area. Council Member Cormack asked the applicant if 
retaining park impact fees would prevent the project from moving forward. 
The applicant replied that is a large line item that must be considered with 
moving the project forward. Council Member Cormack said the public should 
know how park impact fees would be used. Staff said park impact fees for 
the project are $21,370,435.32.  
Council Member Greg Tanaka liked that the project is studio-heavy versus 3 
bedrooms because smaller units are more affordable. Having retail along all 
of El Camino on the first floor would be beneficial. He asked if it the El 
Camino entrance could be the only entrance to the property. Staff said a 
transportation impact study would be needed. 
Council Member Eric Filseth said the project does not meet code and the 
height exceeds surroundings structures. The project is a 15-percent BMR 
project as opposed to 20 percent. He agreed with prior comments regarding 
issues along Matadero Avenue. Matadero Creek preservation would be a 
challenge. Eliminating Driftwood and Cibo along with hotel taxes do not 
benefit the community. Council should not waive the tree protection 
ordinance. RPP would cost nearby residents $50 a permit, which is not a 
community benefit. The project is 85 percent market rate with 75 percent 
studios and 1-bedroom units renting for $3000 to $4000 a month and target 
single professionals. Council Member Filseth perceived this as Silicon Valley 
workforce housing. Actual affordable housing for people who work jobs in 
Palo Alto would be ideal. He said the project would make sense in a different 
area. The current location is ideal for a teacher housing project or another 
Wilton Court. 
Council Member DuBois said a building with this height needs a setback. He 
agreed with Mayor Burt about the concern for losing hotel tax revenue. He 
voiced concerned about open space and did not consider the creek open 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 8 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
space. Keeping curb cuts on El Camino would address concerns about 
Matadero. He agreed with not waiving fees for a market rate project. There 
may be privacy concerns with rooftop terraces. The City should consider 
including a RPP as part of the project. The Council may want to consider 
removing the PHZ zone. The project is asking for too much all at once. A 
smaller project might be feasible. He envisioned a project with a height of 50 
feet or less, curb cuts only on El Camino, and massing pushed toward El 
Camino and away from residential neighborhoods while looking at R-1 zone 
setbacks with more distance from the creek and preserving mature trees. 
Council Member Stone said the PHZ tool allows the Council to negotiate for 
more public benefit from a project, but it was not meant to allow massive 
departures from the zoning code. He voiced concerned about the Matadero 
Avenue safe route to school and the size of the units. The smaller units are 
not necessarily affordable. The Creekside Inn and Driftwood Deli provide tax 
revenues and valuable local services. The only way to reach Regional 
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) requirement of 3000 affordable housing 
units is through government subsidies that would require funding from the 
City raised through impact fees or through partnerships with nonprofit 
housing providers or grants from the state. If the applicant is requesting 
such large variances from the zoning code, it would be fair they pay the 
impact fees. 
Council Member Cormack said something should be done with the Driftwood 
Deli if the project moves forward. She agreed with sole ingress and egress at 
El Camino. A proactive RPP makes sense. The Council should think how to 
evaluate future proposals in light of potential revenue loss, property tax 
increases, and sales tax. 
Vice Mayor Kou cautioned about the need for hotels. Resident needs should 
be considered in project locations. Current retail at the project location 
would be reduced from 8,735 ft2 to 4,000 ft2. The Matadero Avenue safe 
route to school should be kept safe. Vice Mayor Kou thanked Planner Sauls 
for the presentation to the neighborhoods. 
Mayor Burt spoke about affordable housing categories within PHZ. The 
formula needs to be reexamined. Calculated rental prices for different AMIs 
have historically been based on people having parking. Adding parking 
drives up price of residency. Decoupling parking undermines the subsidy for 
the different affordable housing types. Mayor Burt was receptive to adding 
housing while retaining the hotel. 
ACTION: None taken 
Mayor Burt announced a meeting break. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 9 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
 
Agenda Changes, Additions and Deletions 
None.  
Public Comment 
 
1. 
Sherry Gu, 10-year resident of Ramona Street, spoke of a renting 
situation at 3185 Ramona and its impact on the neighborhood. There 
is high resident turnover and loud talking outdoors at night. The 
homeowner and primary renter were contacted with no response. 
Neither live on site. Speaking with the residents did not solve the 
problem. Night noise is an ongoing problem. A single-family house 
can rent 14 sleeping pods which explains the spillover to the 
outdoors at night. Street parking is an issue. She requested the City 
limit how many residents can live in a house. The primary renter 
rents the house for his business, Brownstone Shared Housing. The 
yard is not maintained. Ms. Gu requested banning Brownstone from 
renting single-family houses in Palo Alto because the business 
negatively impacts neighborhoods. 
 
2. 
Bob Moss said no parks have been added in the City in decades. He 
suggested that when a project comes in, the Council consider having 
a portion of the site set aside as a public park. 
 
3. 
Aram James thanked Council Member Tanaka for providing a 
platform for so many different topics such as weaponized police 
canines, tasers, open hiring processes, and reparations. He 
suggested Council Member Tanaka be the next vice mayor. He 
suggested shelving tasers and limiting the canine unit to search and 
rescue and drug searches while reducing that budget. The ACLU 
should be invited to a study session to gain insight on the privacy 
issue and retention of license plate video feeds. 
 
4. 
Jerry Santarpia attempted to speak but had connection issues. 
Consent Calendar 
There were no comments. Mayor Burt asked for a motion to approve. 
MOTION:  Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Kou to 
approve Agenda Item Numbers 3-5. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 10 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
3. Approve Minutes from the September 29, 2022, and October 3, 2022, 
City Council Meetings 
4. Approval of Construction Contract Number C23183908 With GSW 
Construction, Inc., in the Amount of $995,556 for the Two Turnouts 
Upgrade Project (WS-07000) on California Avenue and Page Mill Road; 
Authorization for the City Manager to Negotiate and Execute Related 
Change Orders Not-to-Exceed $99,556; and Approval of Budget 
Amendment in the Water Fund 
5. Approval of Implementation of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency-
Funded (U.S. EPA) Greening Parking Facilities for a Sustainable 
Community Project and Approval of Agreement Between City of Palo Alto 
and City of Santa Clara to Partner on Project, and Approval of a Budget 
Amendment in the Stormwater Management Fund 
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
City Manager Comments 
 
 
City Manager Ed Shikada presented an update on COVID-19 information. 
The CDC booster tool can be found at bit.ly/CDCBoosterTool.  
He thanked those involved in the Making Better Choices in Your Home 
workshop regarding electrification. More information is available at 
www.cityofpaloalto.org/GoElectric. Information on the heat pump water 
heater 
program 
can 
be 
found 
at 
www.cityofpaloalto.org/UpgradeYourWaterHeater.  
The United Nations Association Film Festival begins on October 20. 
The Great Shake-Out is on October 20. The City Council will have its own 
Shake-Out on October 24 at the beginning of the Council meeting. 
Veterans Week events will begin November 7 at MacArthur Park. 
City Manager Shikada outlined the upcoming Council items. 
 
 
 
Action Items 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 11 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
6. TEFRA Hearing Regarding Conduit Financing for the Kehillah Jewish High 
School's for the Partial or Full Refinancing of the 2014 Loan and Financing the 
Development, Construction, Renovation, Improvement and Equipping of the 
Corporation's Campus at 3900 Fabian Way, Palo Alto; and Approving the 
issuance of a Tax-exempt Loan by the California Municipal Finance Authority 
for this Purpose and Other Matters Relating Thereto  
Administrative Services Director Kiely Nose explained the loans being 
discussed are to be issued by the California Municipal Finance Authority 
(CMFA) and are the sole responsibility of the borrower. The City will have no 
financial or legal liability, obligation, or responsibility for the project, 
repayment of the loans, or financing. For a loan to qualify as a tax-exempt 
loan, a public hearing must be conducted. Members of the community can 
speak in favor of or against use of tax-exempt loan proceeds for the 
financing of the project. Advance notice was provided to the community. 
Following closure of the TEFRA hearing, an elected representative of the 
governmental unit hosting the project will provide its approval of the 
issuance of the loans. Council is being asked to conduct a TEFRA hearing and 
adopt a resolution (Attachment A) that approves the issuance of the loans 
by the CMFA for the benefit of the borrower, Kehillah High School. Kehillah 
High School is asking for one or more 501(c)(3) tax-exempt loans not to 
exceed $10.5M for the purposes described above. 
Mayor Burt invited the public to comment. No one stepped forward. 
Mayor Burt invited the Council members to comment. 
Council Member Tanaka asked why cities may say no to such requests. 
Director Nose responded administrative burden is a reason. Council Member 
Tanaka asked why this is not a matter for the school board. Director Nose 
responded it needed to be a public body with established procedures and the 
City commonly hosts these hearings. 
MOTION:  Vice Mayor Kou moved, seconded by Mayor Burt to adopt 
Resolution 10079 approving the issuance of the loan by the California 
Municipal finance Authority for the benefit of the Kehillah High School.  
MOTION PASSED:  7-0 
7. PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of Ten Ordinances That Repeal, and Adopt 
Various Sections of the Palo Alto Municipal Code (PAMC) Related to the 
2022 CA Building Codes (CA Code of Regulations Title 24) Update and 
Proposed Local Amendments  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 12 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
(1) 
Chapter 15.04 Incorporating the 2022 CA Fire Code With Local 
Amendments;  
(2) 
Chapter 16.04 Incorporating the 2022 CA Building Code With Local 
Amendments;  
(3) 
Chapter 16.05 Incorporating the 2022 CA Mechanical Code With 
Local Amendments;  
(4) 
Chapter 16.06 Incorporating the 2022 CA Residential Code With 
Local Amendments and Amending Chapter 16.52 to Align Federal, 
State, and Local Flood Hazard Regulations;  
(5) 
Chapter 16.08 Incorporating the 2022 CA Plumbing Code With Local 
Amendments;  
(6) 
Chapter 16.16 Incorporating the 2022 CA Electrical Code With Local 
Amendments;  
(7) 
Chapter 16.18 Incorporating the 2021 International Swimming Pool 
and Spa Code With Local Amendments;  
(8) 
Chapter 16.14 Incorporating the 2022 CA Green Building Standards 
Code with Local Amendments;  
(9) 
Chapter 16.17 Incorporating the 2022 CA Energy Code Without 
Local Amendments.  
(10) Chapter 16.19 Incorporating the 2022 CA Energy Code With Local 
Amendments. 
Chief Building Official George Hoyt described the California Building 
Standards Code. The current code expires on December 31. The City can 
accept the state mandates or develop local amendments. Proposed 
amendments and Staff recommendations were explained.  
The all-electric building code applies to both residential and commercial 
buildings. The effective date would be January 1, 2023. The requirement of 
heat pump water heaters would become effective January 1, 2023. 
Council Member Tanaka asked if the City requires gluing vent pipes for hot 
water heaters. Chief Building Official Hoyt said the City requires plastic 
piping to be glued and not screwed because a screwed pipe can loosen over 
time and produce exhaust leaks. Council Member Tanaka asked about using 
heat from a home A/C unit to preheat household water.  Chief Building 
Official Hoyt said the industry is moving in that direction and they will have 
to see how it progresses. Council Member Tanaka asked about streamlining 
building permits and inspections regarding solar power and battery walls. 
Chief Building Official Hoyt said a streamlined checklist for residential solar is 
available online. They are piloting SolarAPP+ to permit roof-mounted 
standalone PV systems. Permits for solar panels can be issued in 10 minutes 
using SolarAPP+. Traditional review process takes 2 to 5 days. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 13 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
Council Member Cormack referenced the dwelling unit and congregate 
housing occupancy section and an associated public comment. Chief Building 
Official Hoyt explained the details including rooms used for sleeping 
purposes shall not be less than 70 ft2 and when more than 2 persons occupy 
a room used for sleeping purposes, the required area shall be increased at a 
ratio of 50 ft2 for each occupant. Children under 6 are not counted when 
determining compliance with the code. This provision was created in 
response to pod housing. This was not anticipated to affect senior living 
residences. 
Council Member Cormack asked for additional information on the freeboard 
requirement. Chief Building Official Hoyt explained the California Building 
Code requires 1 additional foot of floor elevation to build a structure in a 
flood plain. Design flood elevation is based on the highest outside adjacent 
grade. If no elevation is set by FEMA, the highest adjacent grade is used. 
Council Member DuBois asked for clarification around commercial building 
electrification and space type and cooling capacity and if this applied to all 
commercial buildings. Chief Building Official Hoyt said this requirement is for 
all commercial buildings including tenant improvements. There are no 
proposed exceptions. Council Member DuBois asked if an existing building 
would be required to put in additional sprinklers. Interim Fire Marshal Scott 
Woodfin said the increased sprinkler requirement is only for certain types of 
occupancies and in certain locations. If someone was changing an occupancy 
from one classification to another, they might be required to add sprinklers 
depending on the fire load. Being in the instances would also trigger 
compliance. There is no requirement to upgrade in an existing multifamily 
structure. 
Council Member Stone asked how the City informs homeowners of historic 
buildings of the State historic building code. Chief Building Official Hoyt 
stated there was no active notification process. Guidance can be provided 
when requested at the Development Center. If the application came through 
the individual review or the planning process, guidance would be provided. 
The Planning office connects with Building to share information. Director Lait 
said they could investigate that. 
Council Member Stone questioned portable propane tanks being used as a 
substitute. Chief Building Official Hoyt clarified small portable propane tanks 
are a good alternative for barbecues. Senior Resource Planner Christine Tam 
stated propane has a lower global warming potential than CO2 and methane, 
which is in natural gas. Director Lait said usage of portable propane tanks 
cannot be monitored as no permit is required. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 14 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
New pools and outdoor spas will require vapor-retardant covers. Council 
Member Stone asked if this would be required for replacement covers for 
existing pools. Chief Building Official Hoyt said there was no way to monitor 
that as no permit is required. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked about the wording in 320.3.13, Safety Certification. 
Interim Fire Marshal Woodfin said they followed the Santa Clara County Fire 
Marshal recommendations. 
Vice Mayor Kou referenced 16.04.450, Section 1803.2, Investigations 
Required, regarding geotechnical investigations being waived. She asked 
how satisfactory data is determined. Interim Fire Marshal Woodfin said he 
would research that. They follow State Water Board recommendations 
regarding groundwater. Chief Building Official Hoyt said engineers doing the 
geotechnical review determine if the data is acceptable for the exception. 
Vice Mayor Kou asked if the City was exceeding State requirements for 
electrification rehabilitation. Chief Building Official Hoyt said the proposal is 
exceeding State requirements. Other cities use a minimum building square 
footage as the qualifier for the substantial remodel definition. Staff proposed 
a combination of square footage, wall height, and roof area. 
Mayor Burt invited the public to comment. 
 
Public Comment 
 
1. 
Jared Johnson, Acterra Policy and External Relations Senior Manager, 
urged the Council to consider more emission reduction actions for 
existing buildings in the Reach Code cycle. He supported a 
requirement for 2-way heat pump systems in cases where existing 
buildings are replacing gas heating systems and when new central 
A/C systems are installed. 
 
2. 
Cedric Pitot de La Beaujardiere said the 50-50 rule is not sufficient in 
determining if a remodel is required to electrify. The addition of a 
financial threshold would ensure homes are getting electrified. He 
supported requiring heat pump HVAC systems in new residential 
building or remodels replacing their HVAC or when an A/C system is 
installed. The City should have incentives for ground source heat 
pumps. He urged the Council to use caution in communications 
regarding EV chargers as level 2 chargers in homes cause a need to 
replace transformers. 
 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 15 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
3. 
Steve Rosenblum suggested the Council look at microgrids for 
neighborhood solar power and storage so when there are problems in 
the area-wide grid, local grids can kick in to smooth the loads. 
Regarding the EV presentation, there was no discussion of EV-to-grid 
power. If interfaced to the grid, EVs could be charged and discharged 
as needed. He endorsed heat pumps for home heating and cooling. 
 
4. 
Hilary Glann of the 350 Palo Alto climate team advocated amending 
the proposed Reach Codes to require both water heaters and 
furnaces to be subject to upgrades during major remodels. She 
encouraged the City to develop voluntary programs in the near term 
for residents to replace gas furnaces. She voiced concern about 
contractors charging high prices to upgrade home electrical service 
and the cost of unnecessary City grid upgrades. 
 
5. 
Andrea Gara of the 350 Palo Alto climate team urged Council to 
commit to quarterly check-ins regarding the heat pump water heater 
program and home electrification resulting from the Reach Codes. If 
goals are not being met, a tiered response is needed as with drought 
water-saving measures. Additional incentives and mandatory options 
should be ready if targets are missed. 
 
6. 
David Coale voiced support for replacing gas furnaces with heat 
pump technology during large remodels. 
 
7. 
Matt Passell urged mandatory programs for transitioning to electric 
appliances. He wanted to hear more about a grid modernization 
program. 
 
8. 
Bruce Hodge of Carbon Free Palo Alto voiced support for extension of 
electrical for all new building types including ADUs and substantial 
remodels. Carbon Free Palo Alto recommends requiring 2-way heat 
pump systems in existing residential buildings when a gas ducted 
heating system is replaced during additions or alterations or when a 
new central A/C system is installed. 
 
9. 
Bret Andersen agreed with prior comments. Extending requirements 
to existing buildings will increase awareness of electrification. 
 
10. Sven Thesen lauded City Council actions taken in 2013 regarding 
requiring access to EV charging for new apartment units. He 
described safety and practical reasons for transitioning from gas to 
electric. He urged the Council to create a sundown date for 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 16 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
neighborhoods with natural gas at which point the gas supply would 
be terminated. 
 
11. Sophie Thesen, age 16, voiced support of the proposed changes. 
 
12. Julia Zeitlin of the Palo Alto Student Climate Coalition (PASCC) voiced 
support of the Council’s climate neutrality goal, the S/CAP goals and 
key action approval, and approval of the heat pump water heater 
program. She voiced support of the current and extended building 
Reach Codes, particularly the requirement of green building 
requirements for new construction projects. She urged the Council to 
expand the code that requires heat pump water heaters when 
replacing water heaters during residential additions or alterations by 
requiring heat pump HVAC systems as well. Commercial buildings 
should be held to similar standards regarding electrification. 
 
13. Amanda Rudin, senior at Gunn High School and member of PASCC, 
echoed Ms. Zeitlin’s comments. She stated natural gas is the second-
highest 
cause 
of 
greenhouse 
gas 
emissions 
in 
Palo 
Alto. 
Electrification will reduce emissions from homes and benefit the 
health of the local ecosystem and the community. 
 
14. Crystal Hernandez, resident of San Mateo and Acterra student 
ambassador 
program 
manager, 
voiced 
support 
of 
building 
electrification and Reach Code updates. She voiced support of 
recommendations made by the San Mateo Climate Action Team and 
seconded their comments. 
Mayor Burt asked Staff if there was reconsideration of the 3-year update 
cycle regarding green building codes. Chief Building Official Hoyt said this 
was not being considered. 
Mayor Burt asked about the pros and cons of adopting the requirement of 2-
way heat pump heating and cooling systems in additions or alterations of 
existing buildings when a gas ducted heating system is replaced and when a 
new central A/C system is installed. Utilities Assistant Director Jonathan 
Abendschein stated requirements as laid out reflect the desired long-term 
direction. The concern in the short term is engineering and operation staff 
time in the Utilities Department. Half the engineering positions are currently 
vacant. The Engineering Department is full engaged. A small volume of 
higher impact appliances could have a significant impact on the engineering 
team. The focus on water heaters was due to the relatively flat loads they 
have over the course of a year with less impact than other electrification 
measures. Space heating peaks in winter at the same time the residential 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 17 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
load peaks. It takes over a year to get new transformers due to supply chain 
issues. Mayor Burt proposed they identify the necessary steps to address 
capacity issues and allow for an update to the program within one year upon 
addressing those issues. 
Council Member Cormack asked why electric kitchens are not required 
during a remodel. Chief Building Official Hoyt said it could be taken into 
consideration next year. Council Member Cormack asked why they are not 
requiring EV equipment to be installed in single and multifamily buildings.  
Senior Resource Planner Tam replied technology is rapidly changing and it is 
better to wait until it is needed. 
Council Member Cormack stated Palo Alto residents used an average of 66 
gallons of water per customer per day in 2020/2021, but the use in 
surrounding cities is much less. She stressed improvements in water usage 
is necessary. 
Mayor Burt said until the City upgrades the residential transformer 
infrastructure, they may not want residents to install higher amperage EV 
level 2 chargers, so staying with the EV-ready program is appropriate. 
Council Member Filseth voiced agreement. 
MOTION:  Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Filseth to 
adopt the proposed ordinances that repeal and adopt various sections of 
the Palo Alto Municipal Code (PAMC) related to the 2022 California 
Building Codes (Cal. Code of Regulations Title 24) and proposed local 
amendments:  
(1) 
Ordinance 5563 repealing PAMC Chapter 15.04 and adopting a new 
Chapter 15.04 incorporating the 2022 Cal. Fire Code with local 
amendments; 
(2) 
Ordinance 5564 repealing PAMC Chapter 16.04 and adopting a new 
Chapter 16.04 incorporating the 2022 Cal. Building Codes and local 
amendments and a new Chapter 16.19 incorporating the 2022 Cal. 
Historical Building Code and Existing Building Code with local 
amendments; 
(3) 
Ordinance 5565 repealing PAMC Chapter 16.05 and adopting a new 
Chapter 16.05 incorporating the 2022 Cal. Mechanical Code with 
local amendments; 
(4) 
Ordinance 5566 repealing PAMC Chapter 16.06 and adopting a new 
Chapter 16.06 incorporating the 2022 Cal. Residential Code with 
local amendments and amending PAMC Chapter 16.52 to align 
federal, state, and local regulations regarding flood hazards; 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 18 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
(5) 
Ordinance 5567 repealing PAMC Chapter 16.08 and adopting a new 
Chapter 16.08 incorporating the 2022 Cal. Plumbing Code with local 
amendments; 
(6) 
Ordinance 5568 repealing PAMC Chapter 16.16 and adopting a new 
Chapter 16.16 incorporating the 2022 Cal. Electrical Code with local 
amendments; 
(7) 
Ordinance 5568 repealing PAMC Chapter 16.18 and adopting a new 
Chapter 16.18 incorporating the 2021 International Swimming Pool 
and Spa Code with local amendments; 
(8) 
Ordinance 5570 repealing PAMC Chapter 16.14 and adopting a new 
Chapter 16.14 incorporating the 2022 Cal. Green Building 
Standards Code with local amendments; 
(9) 
Ordinance 5571 repealing PAMC Chapter 16.17 and adopting a new 
Chapter 16.17 incorporating the 2022 Cal. Energy Code without 
local amendments; 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
MOTION:  Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Council Member Stone to 
direct 
staff 
return 
to 
the 
Council 
as 
soon 
as 
feasible 
with 
recommendations on strategies to increase our electrification workforce to 
be able to ensure electric reliability and expand electrification programs in 
the next year that would incorporate two-way, heat pump, HVAC systems 
upon replacement upon existing gas systems when a new system is 
installed in residential and commercial (roof pack) systems. 
MOTION FAILED: 3-4, Tanaka, Cormack Filseth, DuBois voting no 
Council Member Questions, Comments and Announcements 
Council Member Cormack was pleased to attend the Fire Department’s 
promotion ceremony. She informed the Council of a potential trip for Council 
members to Washington, D.C. next year aligned with the National League of 
Cities. 
Mayor Burt said a good town hall meeting was had with Barron Park, Green 
Acres, and Palo Alto Orchards neighborhoods. The City received notice that a 
proposal was being brought forward to create a joint power authority for the 
Santa Clara County Cities Association. Questions were raised by board 
members and city managers, and they are pulling back on a vote. A deeper 
discussion will be had at the November meeting. 
There will be a Climate Collaboration Summit on November 12 at Gunn High 
School. Mayor Burt will request authorization of a maximum of $5000 from 
the Council Contingency Fund. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
Page 19 of 19 
(Sp.) City Council Meeting 
Summary Minutes 10/17/2022 
 
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 10:45 P.M. 
