CITY COUNCIL RETREAT
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 1 of 21
Special Meeting
February 5, 2022
The
City
Council
of the
City
of
Palo
Alto
met
on this
date
in virtual
teleconference
at 9: 00 A.M. 
Participating Remotely:  
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, 
Tanaka
Absent:  
1. 
Roll Call and Welcome from Mayor
Mayor Burt introduced Mary Egan who facilitated the meeting. 
Facilitator Mary Egan reviewed the agenda and the allotted times for each
agenda item.  She requested that Council Members remain on camera when
possible during the meeting.  Public comment will be taken before Council
begins their discussion of priorities for 2022. 
NO ACTION TAKEN
2. 
Council Retreat Discussion
Mayor Burt shared that Palo Alto City Council has been setting priorities since
1986.  Council will identify up to three Council priorities and those priorities
can carry over up to 3-years. On years of no Council turnover, the same
priorities
may continue
unless
circumstances
change.  
Goal setting
was
supplemented
by input through the Open City Hall process, Staff input, the
National Community
Survey, review of work plans and resident comments. 
For the year 2021, the adopted priorities included economic recovery, housing
social and economic balance, social justice, and climate change – protection
and adaptation.  
City Manager Ed Shikada agreed that the effort of establishing priorities on an
annual basis has existed for many years.  However, over the last several
years, the City has implemented more structure behind the follow- up as to
what happens once Council has established
its priorities. He expressed that
the year 2021 contained many ups and downs due to the Coronavirus ( Covid) 
Pandemic, but the City and the community were able to accomplish many
things.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 2 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Assistant
City Manager
Kiely
Nose
presented
the City’s accomplishments
regarding economic recovery.  During the year 2021, Covid- 19 vaccines were
widely
distributed
and the City began to establish
a new normal.  
The
Economic
Recovery
Strategy
included
four
tenants
which
were
manage
through the pandemic, community wellness and wellbeing, focused business
support, and Citywide priority initiatives. Staff has begun and/ or completed
all 11 subset
initiatives
in the Economic
Recovery
Strategy
Work
Plan.  
Community wellness and wellbeing became a top priority due to folks having
to quarantine and the City offered many virtual and hybrid programs.  The
City continued to support local businesses through Uplift Local and monthly
meetings.  One of the Citywide priorities included Fiber to the Home ( FTTH) 
which was kicked off with community engagement.  That project was slated
to continue into 2022.  Council requested that Staff focus on what the next 6- 
to 18- months will look like and so Staff began work on the University Avenue
Redesign, refined economic development activities, and developed a Request
for Proposal ( RFP) for services.  Council continued to explore ballot measures
for the year 2022.  
Another
Citywide
project included
the Foothills
Fire
Management
Plan
which
Council
held
a
study
session
for
with
other
jurisdictional
partners.  The City will continue to engage with the community
in 2022 on items like the 2022 ballot measure, fiber, and sustainability
work
as the community continues to navigate through the pandemic.  The 2022
Work
Plan for Economic
Recovery
included
topics
such
as management
through the pandemic, reinvestment
in the Palo Alto community, continued
wellness
and
wellbeing
support
through
special
events, support
for the
Chamber of Commerce, and others. 
Planning
and Development
Director Jonathan
Lait presented
on the 2021
priority of housing. He shared that Council advanced a number of the City’ s
Housing Policies in the year 2021.  Several key housing initiatives included the
adoption of the Tenant Relocation Assistance Ordinance, the establishment of
the Housing Element Working Group and Ad Hoc Committee, updates to the
Commercial
Housing
Impact
Fee, and adoption
of the Senate
Bill ( SB) 9
Interim Ordinance.   For the year 2022, Staff will continue work on the Housing
Element Update, SB 9 Interim and Long- Term Ordinances, SB 35 Objective
Standards Ordinance, and several other planning initiatives.  Ongoing projects
included 525 Charleston which contained 50-units of affordable housing, 231
Grant Avenue which contained
110- units of workforce
housing, Geng Road
Safe Parking Facility, Unitarian Universalist Church of Palo Alto ( UUCPA) Safe
Parking
Applications, and Project
Homekey
which contained
88-units for
homeless individuals.  The City was able to obtain 95 net new units of housing
with the majority of those coming from accessory dwelling units. Due to recent
state law changes, the City was able to claim the preservation
of the Bona
Vista
units towards
the very- low- income
category
for the City’s current
Regional Housing Needs Allocation ( RHNA).  In terms of the Comprehensive
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 3 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Plan, the City has produced 829 housing units through the planning cycle to
date and there was potential for more housing units to be built through the
Plan Home Zoning ( PHZ).  Staff continued community engagement
on the
Objective
Standards, the Housing
Element
Working
Group
and
Ad Hoc
Committee, renter protection outreach, and other housing policies.  
Deputy City Manager Chantal Cotton Gaines reported that one of the Council’ s
2021 priority was social justice.  She shared the equity mission statement and
stated that the statement was the foundation that the work was based on.  
Council identified 17 assignments for Staff to work on for race and equity and
Staff was able to accomplish 14 of the 17 assignments.  The City completed
its
first
Demographics
Survey
of
Board
and
Commission
Members, 
implemented
the
Psychiatric
Emergency
Response
Team (
PERT) 
in
collaboration with Santa Clara County, facilitated community conversations
through the Human Relations Commission ( HRC) that focused on race in Palo
Alto and held many community events focused on different backgrounds
and
cultures
within
the
community. 
Key
accomplishments
included
the
implementation
of the new Police Records System ( RMS), expansion of the
Independent
Police Auditor’ s ( IPA) Contract scope, police reform legislation, 
hosting
a
successful
Women
and
Girls
Summit, 
and
many
other
accomplishments. Regarding items in progress, Staff continued to work on the
employee census and demographic analysis, development of an employment
race and equity survey, collecting the Police Stop Data through the new RMS
system, 
and
several
others. 
The
City
conducted
several
community
engagement events such as the Women and Girls Summit and the Town Hall
meetings on hate crimes.  Community engagement for the year 2022 included
the launch of the Calls for Service interactive
map, continued
community
services
and art center programs, continued
library services, and several
others.  Staff will be holding a study session with City Council in 2022 to
discuss race and equity.  All City Boards and Commissions
will have the
opportunity to engage in training on diversity in action and microaggressions.  
Director of Public Works Brad Eggleston presented the snapshot of the City’s
priority of climate change and the work on the Sustainability
and Climate
Action Plan ( S/ CAP).  Staff completed the Impact Analysis on how to achieve
an 80 percent reduction of greenhouse gas ( GHG) by the year 2030 and that
was presented to Council in February, April, and December of 2021. Also, the
S/ CAP goals and key actions were updated, a 3-year Work Plan was drafted
based on Council recommendation, 
and the S/ Cap Ad Hoc Committee
and
Working
Group
were established.  
Items
in progress
included
exploring
additional topics for the S/ CAP Ad Hoc Committee to discuss and finalization
of the S/ CAP report. Regarding
community
engagement, several webinars
were held regarding S/ CAP, the S/ CAP Ad Hoc Committee and Working Group
held
meetings, the
S/ CAP
survey
was
implemented, 
and
several
other
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 4 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
community
engagement
efforts.  Staff planned to establish a climate action
pledge, hold
a two- day
climate
action
summit
and
produce
interactive
engagement tools and marketing materials.  Regarding the outlook for the
year 2022, Staff had a mid- year budget request that included resources for
the S/ CAP.  Staff will be discussing with the Utilities Advisory Commission the
electrification
strategy, finalizing the S/ CAP goals and key actions, complete
the Sea Level Rise Vulnerability Assessment, and others. 
Mayor Burt invited the Council Members to ask technical questions of Staff
before hearing public comment.  
Council Member Cormack inquired how many new homes did the City approve
in 2021.  
Mr. Lait answered 95 units were approved. 
Council Member Cormack asked how much of the accomplishments
for social
justice was Staff work and how much was Council involvement. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines mentioned that the Policy and Services Committee received
quarterly updates on the social justice work and provided comments on how
to refine the work.  Council has been helpful to encourage
the public to
participate in community conversations.  
Council Member DuBois wanted to know if the Bona Vista units were included
in the total RHNA figures. 
Mr. Lait answered yes. 
Council Member DuBois looked forward to hearing more about the MCT Grant
for Downtown Palo Alto. He asked what type of requirements there are for the
MCT Grant. 
Mr. Lait clarified that Staff coming to Council with a presentation on the grant. 
Vice Mayor Kou requested that Staff speak more to the online Calls for Service
interactive map.  
Police
Chief
Robert
Jonsen
explained
that
the
interactive
map
was
implemented
in response to the year 2021 Department
of Justice’ s ( DOJ) 
mandate
to
protect
the
privacy
rights
of
folks
the
police
department
encounters.  The interactive map is a temporary solution.  The department is
developing
a citizens
RMS but that will not be available
for several more
months.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 5 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Mr. Shikada confirmed that the interactive
map was a product of the DOJ’ s
mandate regarding encrypted radio communication.  
The City was exploring
ways to provide information and explored the fire department' s Pulse Point
system. Pulse Point was not interested in building a platform for the police
department but the City’s Information Technology ( IT) Department was able
to build the interactive map.  He acknowledged
that the platform is in Bata
form and Staff continued to improve it based on feedback. 
Vice Mayor Kou inquired who was providing the feedback on the interactive
map platform. 
Mr. Shikada noted that a local media outlet provided feedback. 
Mayor Burt mentioned that Council has not seen an update on the housing
projects for the PHZ that they reviewed.  He requested Staff to provide some
color on that. 
Mr. Lait shared that Staff does not have confidence
that any of the PHZ
projects are moving forward.   
Mayor Burt recalled that several police reforms were implemented over the
past several years and he requested that Staff comment on the 8 Can’t Wait
initiative and encryption. 
Mr. Jonsen stated that the Council has been very engaged in police reform.  
In response to the nationwide 8 Can’t Wait initiative, the police department
proactively changed its policies and provided live screen educational briefings. 
Regarding accountability, the police department expanded the scope of the
IPA.  All of the police department’ s policies are available for public review on
the City’ s website and those are updated every 3-months. The department
also implemented the PERT program with Santa Clara County.  The interactive
map provided an enhanced awareness of Calls for Service. All of those items
were implemented with a reduced workforce. 
Council
Member
Stone
asked
when
Call for Services
were posted
to the
interactive map. 
Mr. Jonsen noted they are posted in 15-minute cycles after the call has been
closed.  Most Calls for Service closed within 45- minutes to an hour of the call
coming in.  The department will continue to use public alert systems if there
is a mass emergency. 
Mr. Shikada noted that the interactive map also provides a link to the daily
log that the police department publishes. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 6 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Mr. Jonsen believed that having an educational briefing on the interactive map
would be valuable.  
Council Member Stone strongly supported Mr. Jonsen’ s suggestion of having
an education briefing on the interactive map.  He encouraged Staff to explore
ways to post incidents closer to real- time. Also, he wanted to hear from other
stakeholders
in the area about how important
it is to have that type of
information
in real- time compared
to what was being
provided
now. He
requested more details about the housing project that was proposed on the
corner of Middlefield Road and University Avenue. 
Mr. Lait confirmed that he would check in with the applicants to see what the
status is.  
Council Member Stone requested that Staff speak briefly about the Santa Clara
County TRUST Program. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines explained that the TRUST program was the rebrand of the
Community
Mobile Response Program.  If there is a mental health situation, 
folks can call the TRUST Program instead of calling the police department. The
program
does not include law enforcement
members.  
The Mobile Crisis
Response Team ( MCRT) also served the City but has a longer response time
than the City’ s police department. 
Council Member Tanaka found it helpful to understand how the City was able
to accomplish
its 2021 priorities. He wanted to understand
how the City
aligned incentives through the organization with the priorities, how other cities
measured
and aligned their priorities, and if there was a way to conduct
quantitative scoring.  
Mr. Shikada confirmed that many cities engage in a similar priority- setting
exercise.  Some cities have a more granular goal for the year that is within a
broad
topic.  
Staff attempted
to be quantitative
where
possible
in their
summary of the accomplishments.  
Facilitator Mary Egan confirmed that most cities go through a similar goal
setting process.  Some cities do a broad set of goals that span over 3-years.  
Some cities use a dashboard
that provides
reports
quarterly
or every 6-
months on the progress for the priority areas. 
Council Member Tanaka confirmed that priorities are important and prioritizing
what is needed is critical.  
Mayor Burt recommended that Council Member Tanaka hold his comments to
the discussion period.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 7 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Council
Member
Tanaka
reminded
Mayor Burt that his role was to be a
facilitator and not to favor one person over another.   
Mayor Burt noted that Council Members must follow the guidelines that have
been set.  He invited members of the public to provide their comments.  
Steven Lee, Vice President of Advocacy for the PTA Council, mentioned that
the Executive Board sent a letter to Council requesting that Council prioritize
mental health for 2022.  While the City has been heavily involved in mental
health, the unique trauma of the pandemic has raised new concerns. The City
must return services to pre-pandemic conditions and also increase funding
and explore mental health impacts from the pandemic.  
Darlene
Yaplee thanked the City and City Staff for mitigating
the aviation
impacts to the City’s residents.  She looked forward to the City’s exploration
of the Ground- Based Augmentation
System ( GBAS) and additional aviation
areas in 2022. 
Hamilton Hitchings wanted to see the restoration of City services be a priority
for the year 2022. He encouraged
Council to use the Budget Surplus to
accelerate
the restoration
of services, restore the Utility Tax, and pass a
Business Tax.  
Greg Schmid
mentioned
that the City has the highest
ratio of employed
workers to employed
residents, but businesses
only paid one- third of local
taxes. He encouraged
the City to limit business expansion and foster real
affordable
housing. He requested
that the City publish data that showed
approvals for new office space and new housing units, increase property taxes
and/ or employment
taxes, and require Stanford University
to contribute to
local government costs. 
Mark Shull disclosed
that there will be major changes
as San Francisco
International
Airport (
SFO) 
introduces
the
GBAS
landing
system. 
He
encouraged the City to become more involved in aviation changes and that it
should be made a priority for 2022. 
Mickey Suen stated that the Gas- Powered Leaf Blower Ordinance has not been
enforced for 15- years. He wanted to see the community
and Council come
together to end the use of gas- powered leaf blowers. 
Rebecca Ward urged Council to prioritize mitigation of jet traffic. She noted
that
Council
has continued
to leave
advocacy
and review
of air space
procedures to citizens instead of having City involvement. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 8 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Karen Holman encouraged Council to focus on the tree canopy within the City. 
She recommended
that Council include trees in the S/ CAP and support the
adopted Urban Forest Master Plan.  She encouraged Council to focus on arts
and culture. 
Christina Schmidt, President of the Palo Alto Council of PTA, requested that
Council
make
mental
health
a 2022 priority. She encouraged
Council
to
prioritize
social services
and community
programs
to address
the mental
health impacts of the pandemic.  Also, to direct the City Manager and Office
of Human Services to explore additional efforts and community partnerships
to address
mental health.  
She recommended
that Council direct all City
departments to identify and evaluate how existing community programs and
resources can address the mental health impacts of the pandemic.  
Amrutha
Kattamuri
spoke
on behalf
of Indira
Selvakumaraswamy, 
Vice
President of Health and Wellness Committee
Palo Alto Council of PTA.  She
noted that the pandemic
and health
restrictions
have exacerbated
many
mental health issues for citizens.  She strongly encouraged the City to make
mental health a top priority for the year 2022. 
Aram James requested that Police Agent Nick Enberg of the Palo Alto Police
Department be fired.  He requested that the IPA report that Council will have
at their February 14, 2022 meeting be made an action item.  
Jennifer Landesmann wanted to have a quieter Palo Alto and urged Council to
make aviation noise a top priority for 2022. 
Kerry Yarkin suggested that Council use the Fast Track Process for airplane
noise.  She strongly encouraged the City to be involved in the discussions for
GBAS and advocate for Palo Alto to not have more flights directed over it. 
Shani Kleinhaus shared that she is a Parks and Recreation Commission but
spoke on behalf of herself.  She supported a previous speaker’ s comment to
prioritize Palo Alto’ s tree canopy in 2022.  She requested that the Objective
Standards include bird safety and lighting standards. Lastly, she agreed that
airplane noise should be the top priority for 2022.  
Katherine
Miller, Member
of the League
of Women
Voters
Task Force on
Campaign Finance Reform, stated that campaign finance reform should be a
priority for 2022 as part of the Council’ s social justice plan.  Many cities in the
State of California have already adopted campaign reforms. 
Lisa Ratner shared that she is on the Board of the League of Women Voters
of Palo Alto.  She mentioned that the Grand Jury recommended
changes in
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 9 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
four broad areas of City policy and the League of Women Voters urged that
those policy changes be a priority for 2022. 
Karen P noted that airplane noise presented a serious risk to health and the
environment.  Palo Alto airport was the busiest single- runway airport in the
State of California and has been the source of very high lead emissions for
years.  She recommended
that the City stop the sale of leaded fuel at the
airport as well as be transparent about who uses the airport. 
Sheryl Klein, Co- Chair of the Housing Element Working Group, remarked that
the City must encourage all types of housing production to meet the goals
outlined in the Housing Element.  She commented that she, and 370 Palo Alto
community
members, have signed a petition
recommending
that the City
prioritize the recommendations
made in the Grand Jury report. 
Catherine Crystal Foster believed it was fundamental
that Palo Alto adopt
sensible local campaign finance reform.  At a bare minimum, the City should
enact a significantly lower individual contribution limit for local elections and
include enhanced discloser requirements. 
Deborah Simon, Chair of Friends of Cubberley, shared that the Friends are
exhausted waiting for action from the City Council and the School Board to
address the concerns at the Cubberley Community Center. 
Penny Ellson spoke on behalf of herself and requested
that the Council tie
together priorities and focus on more specific problems and projects.  She
requested that Council prioritize timely decision- making for multi- modal grade
separations.  
Also, to tie housing, transportation
and community
services
together and adopt the Housing Element to increase and diversify housing
stock. She encouraged the City to restore Staffing positions and fund projects
to facilitate economic recovery. 
Andrea Gara spoke as a Member of the 350. org Palo Alto Climate Team.  The
group requested that Council continue to make climate change and mitigation
a top priority for 2022.  Also, to prioritize electrification, transportation and to
set annual goals and benchmarks to track progress. 
Nancy Tillman asked that Council reopen California Avenue to vehicle traffic
as soon as possible. 
Adrienne Yue, a Member of the League of Women Voters, emphasized the
urgency of implementing some type of campaign finance reform. 
Suzanne Keehn believed that Palo Alto does not have enough open space
and/ or parks.  She recommended that the City use the surplus to restore City
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 10 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
services.  
She supported
the City implementing
a Business
Tax and she
supported requiring Stanford University to make contributions to the City.  
Helene Grossman expressed her support for a focus on safety, health and
quality of life in the community.  She shared that gas- powered leaf blowers
have greatly disrupted her quality of life.  There has been no enforcement of
the City’s Leaf Blower Ordinance.  
Tim Heilig agreed with the previous speaker regarding leaf blowers.  If a leaf
blower is near a school or park, the air quality will diminish for up to 6- to 8-
hours after its use.  He emphasized that the City must act to protect the youth
in the community.  
Matthew Lennig spoke in favor of enforcing the leaf blower ban.  He noted that
outdoor living cannot happen due to the noise and pollution of gas- powered
leaf blowers. 
David Axelrod supported the comments that the City show investigate
code
enforcement
for gas- powered leaf blowers.  He shared how emissions from
gas- powered leaf blowers can be detrimental to children’ s health. 
City Council went on break at 11: 22 A.M. and returned at 11: 31 A.M. 
Ms. Egan asked if any of the Council Members had additional questions of Staff
before Council begins their deliberations.  
Council Member DuBois recommended
that the discussion
be broadened
to
include comments on 2021 priorities as well as the general work plan.  
Mayor Burt agreed. 
Ms. Egan articulated that the goal is to provide Staff with direction on what
the priorities will be for the year 2022 and if any of the year 2021 priorities
be continued into the year 2022. 
Council Member DuBois commented on the economic recovery priority of the
year 2021.  He recommended
that Council discuss fair rental rates for use of
public property for the permanent
parklets.  
Also, the City should explore
reshaping the business mix, explore ways to help hotels and promote Palo
Alto as a destination city.  Regarding FTTH, the timeline needed to be more
concrete and have coherent messaging. Regarding housing, he recommended
combining
the Downtown
Master Plan with the grade crossing for Palo Alto
Avenue and the train station as well as reevaluate vehicle dwelling.  Regarding
social justice, the City has made great progress and that work should be carry
forward into the year 2022. Regarding climate change, the City must focus on
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 11 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
action and execution of the plans that are in place. He wanted to see Castilleja
School
Expansion
Project
come
back
to
Council
for
further
discussion, 
completion of the Roth Building Project, the Tree Ordinance and rebalance the
Capital
Infrastructure Plan ( CIP). Regarding the Planning Department’ s Work
Plan, he wanted to discuss the PHZ, workforce housing, seismic upgrades and
seismic incentives, transparency
and labor negotiations, La Caminda’ s ability
to serve elderly folks in the downtown area, and enforce the gas- leaf blower
ban.  He noted that the National Citizen Survey was always a very useful
document.  He encouraged Council and Staff to fund the survey, accelerate it, 
and have the next survey completed by January 2023 for Council’ s retreat.  
He stated that it is important to discuss items that were not a priority for 2021.  
He shared that based on the feedback that the Policy and Services Committee
received, six Council Members were interested in climate change, six Council
Members were interested in economic recovery items, five Council Members
were interested in housing, four to five Council Members were interested in
City
processes
and fiscal
balance, three
or four
Council
Members
were
interested in social justice, and one or two Council Members were interested
in public safety and crime.  
Council Member Cormack continued to believe that economic recovery is very
important.  It if continued as a priority, Council should rethink what the City
is trying to achieve
and how to achieve it.  She was grateful
for Staff
continually keeping in touch with the business community.  She did not agree
that the City is teed up for success with housing for social and economic
balance.   Many PHZ projects received negative feedback from the Council as
a whole and now those projects were not moving forward.  She supported a
more holistic approach to affordable housing rather than the historical tactical
approach the City has taken.  Social justice continued to be a value that the
City holds and should be worked into all aspects of the City’ s work.  Climate
change continued to be important work and should be made a priority for
2022.  She remarked that the City has reached the point where it needs to
adapt to climate
change
instead
of mitigating
it. Regarding
healthy
City
healthy community, many of the concerns raised by members of the public
including mental health, noise, air quality, fall under that category.  
She
agreed with the suggestion
to rebalance
the CIP and to place Cubberley
Community
Center on the CIP. She remarked that Cubberley
Community
Center could be delegated
to the Finance
Committee
rather than made a
priority.  She reminded the Council that priorities are supposed to be items
that Council spends extra time on, not Staff.  With that said, she suggested
that Council explore creating a new vision for the downtown area due to the
massive shifts of who visits that area. She recommended
referring to the
Policy and Services
Committee
to explore limiting individual
donations
for
campaigns to $500.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 12 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Council Member Stone thanked Staff and the community for the progress that
the City made in 2021.  He supported moving forward the priorities of climate
change and economics.  He encouraged Council to focus on affordable housing
for the coming year.  Palo Alto continuously meets the market- rate housing
RHNA goals and so focusing on affordable housing for low- incomes was very
important.  He wanted to see community safety and health be a priority for
2022.  That category
would include belonging, social justice, healthy City
healthy community, and public safety.  He emphasized that property thief and
crime are on the rise throughout the country.  Public safety also included fire
prevention, code enforcement, emergency services and the City should ensure
that it is fully Staffed in those critical positions.  
Focusing
on community
healthy would demonstrate the City’s commitment to protecting the mental
health of the community, impacts of noise pollution, protecting the City’s tree
canopy and open space.  He argued that work has already been completed or
was underway for a variety of topics under community safety and health.  The
City would use that work to enforce or expedite additional work that the City
was already working on.  
Council Member Filseth aligned his comments with Council Member Cormack’ s
comments
regarding
the post- pandemic
economy
and fiscal sustainability.  
The City must identify if recovery should be to pre- pandemic levels or should
be a recovery that includes significant shifts.  The pandemic proved that the
City greatly depended on out-of-town visitors for revenue and there was no
understanding if that type of interaction would return to pre- pandemic levels. 
He encouraged
the City to reevaluate
the long- term revenue streams and
stated that should be a priority for 2022.  He agreed with Council Member
Cormack and her views on climate change.  He believed that housing and
social- economic balance continued to be an issue and should remain a priority.  
He mentioned
that the Bay Area’ s jobs to housing ratio have continuously
increased over the last 5-years, but Palo Alto’s ratio has begun to decrease.  
Also, the rate of appreciation
of rents has slowed down.  
He expressed
disappointment
that none of the PHZ applications
have not come back to
Council for further review.  Regarding aviation noise, he believed that was not
a top priority of the community
but suggested
that the City have more
engagement with SFO.  He agreed with the comments regarding the National
Citizen’ s survey.  Regarding
public safety, he acknowledged
that property
crime has increased and needed further attention from the City.  The City has
made progress with police reform, but emergency
response
needed to be
reevaluated.  He suggested that campaign finance reform focus on out-of-
town money and professional financial interest funding. 
Vice Mayor Kou aligned her comments with Council Member DuBois’ s as well
as Council Member Filseth’ s comments regarding aviation involvement.  She
agreed that there are health impacts when it comes to airplane noise.  She
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 13 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
recommended
that the City explore the City’ s current noise levels and code
enforcement.  
She
supported
Council
Member
Stone’ s comment
about
exploring
community
safety
and community
health.  
Her recommended
priorities for 2022 include healthy City healthy community, local economic
development, climate change protection and adaptation, and push back on
state legislation that trumps local control.  She encouraged Council to revisit
the City’s quiet zones to help with train noise.  She referenced the Healthy
City Healthy Community Resolution and recommended that the City make it a
priority for 2022.  Regarding street redesign, she encouraged the City to work
with the businesses, the residents, and the City’s economic
development
manager.  She wanted Council to not only focus on housing but incorporate
all quality of life components. 
Mayor Burt agreed with Council Member Cormack that some of the priorities
are more values of the community than priorities.   He recommended that the
Policy and Services Committee evaluate fiscal sustainability, social justice, and
environmental
sustainability. 
He
found
Council
Member
Stone’ s
recommendation
for community
safety and health priority intriguing.  
He
appreciated Council Member Cormack’ s comment on whether recovery was an
adequate way to capture both recovery and transition.  He did not agree that
the priorities are topics that only Council Members should focus on and stated
that the priorities drive Staff’s work plan. He linked youth wellbeing to healthy
community and stated that should be a broad value concept.   He encouraged
Palo Alto Council of PTAs and Palo Alto Unified School District to reengage
more with Project Safety Net. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted Council to focus on basic City functions.  He
supported
Council
Member
Stone and Council Member
Filseth’ s comment
regarding crime.  He noted that many members of the public have sent in
letters that expressed
concern about crime in the City.  He wanted to see
crime prevention be the number one priority for 2022.  He agreed with Council
Member Filseth that many companies are allowing their employees to continue
to work from home. Working from home helped the environment, but was bad
for the economy.  He shared that the City of Mountain View rents their City
properties out for market rate.  Palo Alto does not and he encouraged Council
to consider moving to the City of Mountain View’ s model to help with economic
recovery.  
Also, Council should discuss how to continue
City services to
residents while decreasing expenses and increasing revenue.  He agreed that
Downtown
Palo Alto needed to be revitalized. He suggested
that the City
explore having a Palo Alto coin, similar to Bitcoin.  
Ms. Egan suggested that a referral be made to the Finance Committee to
explore a Bitcoin for Palo Alto.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 14 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Council Member Tanaka mentioned that many cities are moving toward city
coins because it kept money in the City.  He wanted to understand what more
the City can do for mental health.  He believed that through better City
operations, the ban on gas- powered leaf blowers can be enforced. Regarding
aviation noise, he felt that was more of a federal issue than a City issue and
he encouraged
the City to have a representative
who can advocate for the
City to explore the topic more.  
The Council went on a lunch break at 12: 30 P.M. and returned at 12: 50 P.M. 
Mayor Burt asked how the other Council Members felt about referring to the
Policy and Services Committee the values that have been raised.  Those would
include items that are critical for the City to continue year after year.  
Ms. Egan agreed that Council did have fiscal and environmental sustainability
as
priorities
but
those
have
changed
into
values.  
Based
upon
the
conversation, the goal of economic recovery should be retitled and housing
should
continue
as a priority
for 2022
as well
as climate
change
and
adaptation.  Council Member Cormack recommended
that social justice be
considered a value and incorporated into all City activities.  Several Council
Members supported having healthy City healthy community as a priority and
that would include public safety, mental health, noise, and quality of life goals.  
MOTION: Council Member
Cormack
moved, seconded
by Council Member
Stone to select the following as the 2022 Council Priorities; 
A. 
Economic Recovery and Transition; 
B. 
Climate Change – Protection and Adaptation; 
C. 
Meeting Housing Obligations, with an emphasis on Affordable Housing; 
and
D. 
Community Health and Safety. 
Council Member Cormack agreed that the City is at an inflection point in terms
of economic
recovery.  
She stated
that
many
Council
Members
shared
concerns about climate change. Regarding housing, she noted that 2022 is a
crucial year for the City to make key housing decisions. She believed that a
healthy City healthy community
enabled the City to address
many of the
concerns
expressed
by the public.  
Regarding
crime and safety, she was
persuaded
that there was an increase in crime nationwide
and having a
healthy community would allow folks to feel safe.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 15 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Council
Member
Stone
recommended
that Item
C of the motion
call out
affordable housing. 
Council Member Cormack agreed. 
Council Member Stone suggested that Item D have a focus on community
health and safety.  He agreed that crime was rising nationwide, but wanted to
address the concerns regarding crime within the City.  
Council Member Cormack believed that Council Member Stone’ s amendment
was an umbrella description and requested that Staff provide comments.  
Mr. Shikada expressed his concern that a healthy city and safety may not be
easily interpreted.  He requested that Council clarify how the two are linked
together.  
Council Member Cormack accepted Council Member Stone’ s amendment.  She
inquired if referrals to Council Committees should be part of the main motion
or be a separate motion.  
Mayor Burt recommended
they be done separately.  
Council Member DuBois remarked that crime is a basic mission of the City and
viewed any actions as being part of the budget process.  He did not support it
being a strategic
focus.  
He found the comments
about having
Stanford
University
make
contributing
payment
instead
of
tax
interesting.  
He
cautioned on including several subsets under broad priority topics.  He agreed
with Council Member Cormack that the priorities should be specific, and he
agreed that Item D, community health and safety, was an umbrella item.  He
suggested
that the priorities
for 2022 should be climate change, focus on
developing
a
community- serving
business
mix, 
and
streamlining
City
processes.  He mentioned that housing has been a priority for the last 6-years
and has become operationalized.  He recommended that economic recovery
not be a priority
because
the City must plan for an economic
shift. The
discussion should be focused on economic development and the City’ s existing
business mix.  Regarding streamlining City processes, he mentioned that there
is a unique opportunity
for the City to explore avenues of how to deliver
services, jobs
design
and
how
to invest
differently.  
He
recommended
removing
Letter
C, meeting
housing
obligations
with
an
emphasis
on
affordable housing, from the motion. 
Council Member Cormack did not support that amendment. 
AMENDMENT: Council Member DuBois moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Kou
to remove Part C, ‘ Meeting Housing Obligations,’ from the motion.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 16 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Council
Member
DuBois
emphasized
that
he
was
not
against
housing
production.  The Housing Element will be completed in 2022 and will require
a lot of Staff and Council time.  
Vice Mayor Kou agreed that the City was currently working on the Housing
Element, but also that there was new state legislation that was coming.  She
wanted to focus on all components that go with housing and not focus just on
producing housing.  
Mayor Burt mentioned that he wanted to retain the housing priority of 2021
for social and economic balance.   He mentioned that housing was an item
that the City has not had success on.  One of the social issues was that RHNA
treated all housing elements the same which incentivized Cities to have non-
family housing.  
Council Member Filseth agreed with Mayor Burt’s comments and he supported
using the language from the 2021housing
priority.  He agreed that the City
will focus on finalizing
the Housing Element.  He did not understand
what
obligations’ meant in Letter C of the motion.   
AMENDMENT
FAILED: 3-4 Burt, Cormack, Stone, Tanaka
Mayor Burt proposed to change Letter C of the motion to housing for social
and economic balance. 
Council Member Cormack accepted the amendment.  
Council Member Stone accepted the amendment. 
Council Member DuBois understood
the interest in community
health and
safety but felt it was too broad.  He recommended
replacing the language of
Letter D of the motion to read ‘ with a focus on streamlining City processes’. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed that focusing on streamlining City processes
was a good idea but should not be a priority.  
Mayor Burt announced that there is no second for Council Member DuBois’ s
amendment.  
He remarked
that the City must
focus
on both
economic
recovery and transition.   He supported Council having climate change as a
priority as well as community health and safety.   He acknowledged that there
were drastic cuts several years ago to the police and fire department.  That
has resulted in increased crime within the City.  He emphasized that it was
Council’ s job to communicate with the community the reality of the challenges
that the City faced and the impacts of the budget cuts that were made several
years ago.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 17 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Vice Mayor Kou inquired if each priority should contain action items to help
Council be more focused and provide Staff with better direction.  
Mr. Shikada explained that Staff will be bringing forward Work Plans for each
priority.   
Vice Mayor Kou asked when those work plans would be coming to Council.  
Mr. Shikada answered it depended on how broad the priorities were defined.  
Mayor Burt noted that the proposed priorities are not any broader than past
Council priorities.  
Mr. Shikada explained that community health and safety may require more
time to draft a Work Plan for. 
Mayor Burt noted that Council
will be discussing
the mid- year budget at
Council’ s next meeting. 
Mr. Shikada emphasized that Council should not believe that the Work Plans
coming back is an insignificant effort. 
Council Member Filseth understood that Council Members were hesitant to use
the word “ recovery” in Letter A of the motion because of the implication that
the City would be returning to a pre-pandemic
state.  He recommended
renaming Letter A to post- pandemic economy and recovery. 
Council
Member
Cormack
did
not
accept
the
amendment
due
to
local
businesses requesting that the City focus on recovery.  
Mayor Burt agreed that there was no need to reference the pandemic in the
motion.  
Council Member Filseth suggested that Council include high- level bullet points
under the priorities to help focus the priority.  
Council Member Cormack agreed.  
Mayor Burt agreed and suggested they not be included in the priority but be
supplemental to the priority.  
Council Member Tanaka emphasized that crime prevention has strong support
among the community.  He proposed to change Letter D, community health
and safety, to community health and crime prevention.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 18 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Council
Member
Cormack
did not accept
the amendment
because
safety
encompassed more than crime prevention.  
Mayor Burt noted that there was not a second to the amendment.  
Vice Mayor Kou recommended to include under Letter C, housing for social
and economic balance, to adopt the Palmer Act and explore no net loss of
housing and commercial development.  
Mayor Burt requested the Council Members not to be granular on guidance to
Staff. 
Vice Mayor Kou withdrew her suggestion. 
Ms. Egan suggested that Council provide guidance to Staff for each priority.  
Council Member DuBois recommended
adding air quality to Letter D of the
motion.  He restated that the post- pandemic mix may not be considered
recovery in Letter A of the motion.  He wanted to explore what makes sense
post- pandemic and understand that the pre- pandemic state of the City may
not make sense.  He confessed he did not know what the definition was for
the word recovery and recommended adding under Letter A, cohesive vision
for the City’s commercial core.  
Council Member Cormack accepted the amendment.  
Council Member Stone accepted as well.  
Vice Mayor Chair Kou recommended
adding noise to Letter D, i. 
Council
Member
Cormack
agreed.  
She recommended
adding “ sense
of
belonging” to Letter D, i.  
Council Member Stone supported the addition.  
Mayor Burt agreed with the concept of sense of belonging but was not sure
about the phrasing.  
MOTION: Council Member Cormack moved, seconded by Council Member
Stone to select the following as the 2022 Council Priorities: 
A. 
Economic Recovery and Transition; 
i. 
Cohesive vision for our commercial cores; 
B. 
Climate Change – Protection and Adaptation; 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 19 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
C. 
Housing for Social and Economic Balance; and
D. 
Community Health and Safety: 
i. 
Crime, mental health, air quality, noise, sense of belonging. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0
Mr. Shikada mentioned that Council can move the discussion of the Committee
Work Plans to an upcoming Council agenda.  
Mayor Burt inquired if the Policy and Services Committee should take up the
discussion regarding community values. 
Council Member DuBois supported Mayor Burt’s idea. 
Council Member Cormack wanted Council to discuss referrals to the Policy and
Services Committee in their entirety in conjunction with what the Policy and
Services Committee already has.  
Mayor Burt acknowledged that other Council Members may have referrals they
wish to make to Committees.  He commented that referring community values
to the Policy and Services Committee was linked to the priority setting.  
Mr. Shikada recommended that Council keep in mind the expectation of Staff
report work that would lead into the Committee discussion.  
Mayor Burt envisioned
no Staff work for the guiding values.  As Staff does
ongoing work, the work would be filtered through the guiding values of the
community such as social justice and sustainability.  
MOTION: Mayor Burt moved, seconded by Vice Mayor Kou to refer to the
Policy and Services Committee on: 
A. 
Recommending
to the Council a set of values that would continue over
successive years as values of the city and the community; 
B. 
Considering the following topics, but not limited to: 
i. 
Fiscal Sustainability; 
ii. 
Social Justice; 
iii. 
Healthy City Healthy Community; and
iv. 
Environmental
Sustainability. 
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 20 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Mr. Shikada
noted
that there
are a set of values
in the annual
budget
document.  
Those values were quality, courtesy, efficiency, integrity, and
innovation.  
Mayor Burt stated that those are internal operational values as opposed to a
City Government
values.   
He recommended
that the Policy and Services
Committee review those operational values and statements as well.  
Council Member Cormack understood
that the operational
values are more
about how the City does it work and not what kind of work it performs.   She
mentioned that the Policy and Services Committee will have to determine what
other community
values there may be and how to integrate
those.   
She
appreciated the motion as a way to segregate the items that are important to
the City and the thing that are important for the City to do.  
Council Member Tanaka requested clarification on how the motion is different
than the priority setting motion.  
Mayor Burt explained that within each value are many subtopics and elements.  
Priorities are supposed to be on focused areas for up to 3-years and the values
are enduring.  
Council Member Tanaka felt that the recommendation was ambiguous.  
MOTION PASSED:  6-1, Tanaka no
Ms. Egan announced that the discussion about Committee work will be moved
to a future Council meeting.  She asked if Staff was clear on what the next
step was with the values discussion. 
Mr. Shikada did not expect there to be substantive
report writing, but that
there would be community interest.  
Ms. Egan summarized that Staff will take the adopted priorities and draft Work
Plans that will be submitted to Council for adoption.  
Mr. Shikada confirmed that is correct.  
Council
Member
DuBois
asked
when
will
protocols
and
procedures
be
discussed.  
Mr. Shikada mentioned that the protocols and procedure document was being
reformatted and will come to Council in March 2022. 
Ms. Cotton Gaines mentioned that the draft version will be presented to the
Policy and Services Committee in March of 2022.  
SUMMARY MINUTES
Page 21 of 21
City Council Retreat
Summary Minutes:  02/ 04/2022
Council Member DuBois stated that the document
has been with the Policy
and Services Committee for 3-years and recommended
that it be brought to
Council.  He shared that a member of the public had suggested aligning the
Municipal Code with the City’s practice of supplying reports 11-days before a
meeting.  He supported that recommendation.  
City Attorney Molly Stump announced that Staff can bring that forward if there
is a misalignment. 
Mayor
Burt
found
the
process
efficient
and
appreciated
the
public
participating.  
Adjournment:  The meeting was adjourned at 2: 02 P.M. 
