CITY COUNCIL 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
       
 
 
1 
 
The City Council and the Public Improvement Corporation of the City of Palo 
Alto met on this date in virtual teleconference at 5:01 P.M. 
Present: 
Burt, Cormack, DuBois, Filseth, Kou, Stone, Tanaka 
Absent: 
None 
CALL TO ORDER 
CLOSED SESSION   
 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
Rebecca Eisenberg referenced Herb Borock’s letter dated April 30, 2022 
which urged Council to reject Staff’s recommendation to negotiate with the 
Sobrato Organization.  She noted the Planning and Development Services 
Department often gave the impression that they were speaking on behalf of 
the developer.  She encouraged a more transparent process. 
 
MOTION: Mayor Burt motioned, seconded by Council Member Dubois to 
adjourn to Closed Session.  
 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
1. 
CONFERENCE 
WITH 
CITY 
ATTORNEY-POTENTIAL 
LITIGATION  
Subject: 
Threatened 
litigation 
regarding 
interpretation 
and 
application of non-conforming use provisions for 340 Portage and 
associated addresses, as set forth in September 10, 2021 letter from 
Sobrato Organization Authority: Potential Exposure to Litigation 
Under 
Government 
Code 
Section 
54956.9(d)(2)  
One Case, as Defendant 
Mayor Burt announced there was no reportable action. 
SPECIAL ORDER OF THE DAY  
2. 
Appointment of Candidates for the Parks and Recreation Commission  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
2 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
First Round of voting for one partial term position on the Parks and 
Recreation Commission ending March 31, 2023.  
City Clerk Lesley Milton reported Council held a special meeting and 
interviewed all of the candidates for the Parks and Recreation Commission.  
The appointee would fill one partial term and the term ended on March 31, 
2023. 
Lester Ezrati:  
Jason Schmidt: Cormack, Tanaka   
Joy Oche: Burt, Stone 
Mark Weiss:  
Eve Klein: Kou, DuBois, Filseth 
 
No Candidate received four votes required to be appointed to the 
full-term expiring March 31, 2023. 
Second Round of voting for one partial term position on the Parks and 
Recreation Commission ending March 31, 2023.  
Jason Schmidt: Tanaka, 
Joy Oche: Cormack, Burt, Stone,  
Eve Klein: Filseth, DuBois, Kou  
No Candidate received four votes required to be appointed to the 
full-term expiring March 31, 2023. 
 
Third Round of voting for one partial term position on the Parks and 
Recreation Commission ending March 31, 2023.  
Joy Oche: Burt, Cormack, Filseth, Stone, Tanaka, Kou 
Eve Klein: DuBois 
 
Candidate Joy Oche receiving 6 votes is appointed to the full-term 
expiring March 31, 2023. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
3 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
 
RECESS FOR COUNCIL MEETING AND CALL TO ORDER PUBLIC 
IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION  
 
The Board of Directors for the Palo Alto Public Improvement Corporation was 
called to order at 9:07 PM 
3. 
Approval of Fiscal Year 2021 Palo Alto Public Improvement 
Corporation's Annual Financial Statement 
Administrative Services Director Kiley Nose reported the Public Improvement 
Corporation (PIC) was a non-profit led by the City.  PIC enabled the City to 
issue Certificates of Participation (COP) to fund the Capital Improvement 
Program (CIP).  There were three outstanding COP equating to $146.5 
million in outstanding principal.  The most recent COP issued was for the 
Public Safety Building.  
PUBLIC COMMENT: None  
Board Member Cormack stated the documents were consistent with the work 
that had been undertaken by the Council on behalf of the community.  
MOTION: Board Member Cormack motioned, seconded by Mayor Burt to 
approve the Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 Annual Financial Report for the Palo Alto 
Public Improvement Corporation. 
 
MOTION PASSED: 6-1, Tanaka no 
ADJOUNRN PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION AND RECONVENE 
COUNCIL MEETING 
STUDY SESSION  
4. 
Fiscal Year 2023 Proposed Budget Study Session  
City Manager Ed Shikada stated the Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 Proposed Budget 
represented a recovery and transition from the COVID-19 Pandemic.  The 
Proposed Budget included Council's previous direction that the long-range 
financial forecast assume a conservative recovery estimate over the next 
3- to 5-years.  Also, it reflected a more rapid investment in services and 
support for the workforce.  During FY 2023, Council will consider funding 
for affordable housing and grade separations.  The Proposed Operating 
Budget totaled $934.2 million with $247.2 in the General Fund (GF), 
$351.8 million in the Proposed Capital Budget and $789.0 million over the 
five-year Capital Improvement Program (CIP).  The Proposed Budget 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
4 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
included the addition of 38.85 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) positions which 
totaled to 1,015 FTE positions Citywide.  The Proposed Budget attempted 
to balance the pace of alignment of resources with the pace of recovery.  
Also, it recognized the use of one-time funding to facilitate priority service 
enhancements that were identified.  On May 24, 2022, Finance Committee 
will receive the final revised balancing strategy and then Staff will present 
the item to Council on June 20, 2022.  The Council and the Finance 
Committee continued to monitor over the past 6-months the City’s 
financial conditions.  The City had been having a more comprehensive 
discussion in parallel regarding long-term fiscal sustainability.  The 
discussions pertained to the affirmation of the current natural Gas Utility 
Transfer as well as the implementation of a Business Tax.  The Council 
continued to evaluate and consider placing both measures on the 
November 2022 ballot.  Staff conducted a robust community engagement 
process about the ballot measures through surveys, polling, and online 
feedback. 
Administrative Services Director Kiley Nose remarked the City’s largest 
revenue source was net sales and other revenues.  The Citywide expenses 
totaled $934.2 million with the CIP being the largest expense and then 
salary and benefits.  The Proposed Budget included 551 FTE in the General 
Fund.  The Council approved in FY 2022 $6.6 million in ongoing resources 
which included $3.2 million in the GF.  This equated to a net addition of 20 
FTE positions and three part-time positions with 12.66 being in the GF.  
The Council reviewed and approved the FY 2023 GF Long Range Financial 
Forecast in January 2022.  The financial forecast did not include 
restorations of any services.  The GF Budget totaled $247.2 million which 
was partially funded by the use of reserves.  Property Tax, Sales Tax, and 
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) remained the top three tax revenues for 
the City.  Staff continued to track, monitor and update the GF revenues 
when new data points became available.   Tax revenues had increased by 
$4 to $5 million and the proposed revenue was $3.6 million higher than 
estimated in the Long Range Financial Forecast.  The primary portion of 
City expenses were invested in public safety and community and library 
services.  One-time funding equated to a $14 million surplus from FY 
2022.  The FY 2023 Proposed Budget recommended that $8.9 million of 
the surplus be used for service investment over a 2-year period and a $5 
million contribution to the Budget Stabilization Reserve (BSR).  The 
Proposed Operating Budget proposed to continue the investment in the 
neighborhood community and library services, address Staffing concerns 
in public safety, investments in several key areas for planning and 
transportation, investments in infrastructure and environment, and 
restoration of internal services/appointees.  Non-departmental impacts 
included the inclusion of the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) revenue, 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
5 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
the reserve for the Utility Transfer litigation, FY 2023 restorations, the 
Supplemental Pension Trust, the reserve for Project HomeKey and the 
reserve for labor and inflation.  Staff recommended 2-year funding for 
restoration of services.  The Proposed Budget included 23 FTE with five 
part-time positions.  The 5-years CIP Plan showed a significant increase 
from FY 2022 due to the investment in the Regional Water Quality Control 
Plant.  The largest expense in the 5-year CIP Plan was the Enterprise Fund 
and then the Capital Project Fund.  The City took a significant reduction in 
capital funding during the COVID-19 Pandemic but the funds were slowly 
growing back.  The 2023 Capital Improvement Fund revenues equated to 
$82 million with the greatest revenue coming from the fund balance and 
reserves.  Staff was seeking additional feedback on the budget strategies 
as well as the review process moving forward. 
 
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
Rebecca Eisenberg strongly recommended Council implement a progressive 
Business Tax which could be used to restore all the services that were 
eliminated during the pandemic. 
Mora Oommen, Executive Director of Youth Community Service (YCS), 
highlighted the work done through the Youth Connective Initiative and urged 
Council to reinstate the funding for the program.  
Aram James wanted a review of the Palo Alto Police Department’ K-9 Unit 
budget and how much the City spent on tasers.  He urged Council to restore 
services for mental health. 
Linda Lenoir, a Board Member of YCS, noticed there was no budget proposed 
for teen and youth services in the FY 2023 Proposed Budget.  She 
emphasized the importance of the feeling of connectedness among the 
youth. 
Bob Moss (In-person) recommended the City start setting aside funding for 
grade separations.  He encouraged the City to advocate to the State of 
California for a portion of the State’s surplus.  Also, he encouraged the City 
to hire more City Staff skilled in mental health support. 
Helene Grossman thanked the City for adding another Code Enforcement 
Officer. She encouraged Council to provide funding for public education 
about gas-powered leaf blowers and implement a trade-in program. 
Matt Schlegel was proud that Palo Alto recognized the urgent need for a 
fossil-fuel-free future.  He encouraged the City to quicken its pace to reach 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
6 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
its greenhouse gas emissions reduction goal of 80 percent by the year 2030 
(80x30). 
Mayor Burt asked if the Council wanted to have a check-in after the Finance 
Committee did its first evaluation of the FY 2023 Proposed Budget.  He 
encouraged Council to discuss whether to use surplus funds over 2 years for 
additional Staff restoration. 
Council Member Filseth pointed out there was a decrease in expenditures of 
$2 million between the FY 2022 Adopted Budget and the FY 2022 Projected 
Budget. 
Ms. Nose stated the savings was from vacant Staff positions.  
Council Member Cormack asked what would it take to accelerate the 
recovery and restoration of the GF transfer to the CIP Fund.  
Ms. Nose confirmed the FY 2023 Proposed Budget assumed a 4-year 
recovery and restoration period but Council could change it.  Any surplus 
after the BSR reached target levels could be moved to the Pension Trust 
Fund or the CIP Fund. 
Council Member Cormack inquired what would happen if the Gas Utility 
Transfer was reaffirmed.  
Ms. Nose answered Staff would return to Council with budget adjustments. 
Council Member Cormack wanted to understand the probability of the City 
receiving $10 million from the TOT.  
Ms. Nose remarked the estimation reflected the trends but agreed there 
were many moving parts. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the City would continue to use contractors 
in the interim until Staff positions were filled. 
Ms. Nose articulated the Budget assumed full funding which gave 
departments flexibility to hire contractors. 
Mr. Shikada noted the Planning and Development Services Department was 
pursuing the use of overtime as a way of bridging capacity. 
Ms. Nose reminded the Council that they did approve new labor contracts 
after the estimates and so the expenditure difference for FY 2022 had 
decreased.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
7 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
Council Member Cormack noticed the Newell Street Bridge estimates were 
the same figures at prior years and believed they should be higher.   Also, 
there was no funding for Ramos Park.  She asked if the design was 
completed for Fire Station #4.  The Baylands Levy Repair should be aligned 
with the Valley Water title gate closures.  She was surprised to see no 
expenditures listed for technology in the outer years.  
Council Member Stone wanted to understand how a possible short-term 
recession was contemplated in the FY 2023 Proposed Budget and 
projections. 
Ms. Nose explained Staff tried to acknowledge all the variables at play and 
hedge them as part of the Budget. 
Council Member Stone remarked the Budget included 23 FTE for the 2-year 
transitional phase.  He asked what departments were those positions located 
in. 
Ms. Nose confirmed the positions were scattered among the different 
departments. 
Council Member Stone understood those positions were temporary unless 
the ballot measures passed. 
Ms. Nose explained if the ballot measures passed, Council could continue to 
fund the positions or the Council could reevaluate the positions.  
Council Member Stone recommended that point be made clear in 
engagement with the public about the ballot measures.  Regarding the 
transmittal letter stating favorable construction market pricing, he inquired if 
construction costs had dropped. 
Ms. Nose explained the intention was to move as quickly as possible to begin 
construction projects before prices increased further.  
Council Member DuBois invited Staff to explain the impacts of the California 
Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS) Discount Rate going from 
6.2 percent to 5.3 percent. He understood the impact of the change in the 
Discount Rate was it took money away from the Budget and placed it in the 
Trust to pay future pensions.  
Ms. Nose answered that is correct. 
Mayor Burt articulated that the surplus was very heavily weighed by the 
significant investment proposal for the Waste Water Treatment Plant.  He 
asked what the cost was for the Waste Water Treatment Plant 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
8 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
improvements.  He noted the cost was shared between Palo Alto and five 
other agencies.  
Ms. Nose stated the cost was $167.8 million.  
Mayor Burt affirmed that level of investment was long overdue.  He asked if 
all the funds would be spent in FY 2023. 
Ms. Nose believed the investment would be encumbered.  
Mayor Burt understood the Long Range Financial Forecast reflected the year 
those funds were encumbered as opposed to the year the funds were spent. 
Ms. Nose concurred. 
Mayor Burt confirmed during the mid-year Budget review the Council 
authorized several Staff positions to be restored.  Those positions remained 
vacant due to the high competition in the market and the struggle to recruit 
and retain.  He asked what portion of those positions were filled and what 
was the realistic timeframe for hiring the remaining vacant positions.  
Ms. Nose did not want to speculate on the timeframe and the City continued 
to prioritize recruitment. 
Human Resources Director Rumi Portillo added the City had hired more 
employees in FY 2022 compared to FY 2021.  The analysis showed that the 
number of applicants continued to be smaller and Human Resources was 
having to post positions several times to the market. 
Mayor Burt restated what positions were filled from the restatements made 
at the mid-year.  He questioned whether to authorize more Staffing positions 
in the FY 2023 Proposed Budget when the reality was that the City was 
having a hard time recruiting folks. 
Council Member Tanaka believed the City’s daytime population was still low 
compared to pre-pandemic times. 
Mr. Shikada stated anecdotally that was consistent with the data. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked theoretically the City’s services should be 
aligned to the number of folks using the services.  He inquired if the debt 
services had fixed interest.  
Ms. Nose believed they all had fixed interests.  
Council Member Tanaka asked what the driver was for the increase in 
general expenses.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
9 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
Ms. Nose explained general expenses were listed in non-departmental 
charges. 
Council Member Tanaka asked what the current inflation rate was.  
Ms. Nose answered in December 2021 it was a little over 4 percent. 
Council Member Tanaka remarked salary and benefits increased by 10.9 
percent.  He asked what the percent increase was per employee for the  FY 
2023 Proposed Budget compared to the FY 2022 Budget.  
Ms. Nose informed she would research it.  
Council Member Tanaka mentioned one of the largest increases was in the 
City Manager’s Office. 
Ms. Nose noted Council recently added two FTE for economic development 
and housing.  
Council Member Tanaka commented there are two economic concerns.  One 
was how much more money could the federal government print and the 
second was economic activity.   Given the economic uncertainties, he 
suggested the City hire contractors or partner with neighboring Cities 
instead of hiring full-time Staff members. 
Mr. Shikada invited Council Member Tanaka to identify specific areas and 
recommend the Finance Committee discuss it.  
Council Member Tanaka recommended the Finance Committee identify the 
areas of opportunity that could be contracted out. 
Mayor Burt specified many CIPs had a 50-years lifespan and were debt-
financed.  He encouraged the City to explore additional debt financing for 
major projects.  The Current Debt Policy was to not exceed 10 percent of 
annual operating expenses.  He asked for an update on debt service in 
relation to operating expenses. 
Ms. Nose indicated Staff will research it. 
Mayor Burt recommended that the information be included in the Budget 
strategies.  He saw there was $2 million budgeted for the Bike and 
Pedestrian Master Plan implementation.  He asked how can the plan be 
implemented if it is not complete, how will be funded, and what grants was 
the City pursuing for the Bike and Pedestrian Master Plan. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
10 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
Ms. Nose confirmed the project was a $5 million project over the 5-year CIP 
Plan with half of the funding coming from the Stanford University Medical 
Center (SUMC) Fund. 
Chief Transportation Official Philip Kamhi mentioned the project was the 
implementation of the 2012 Bike and Pedestrian Master Plan.  Once the Bike 
and Pedestrian Master Plan Update is completed, projects could be 
reprioritized. 
Mayor Burt inquired if the Budget included funding to complete the Bike and 
Pedestrian Master Plan Update. 
Mr. Kamhi confirmed funds were not available to fully complete the 2012 
Bike and Pedestrian Master Plan.  There would be an overlap between the 
2012 and the updated Bike and Pedestrian Master Plan. 
Mayor Burt wanted to see how much funding the 2012 Bike and Pedestrian 
Master Plan would need in order to complete the plan.  During the grade 
separation discussions, there was discussion about improving bicycle access 
between Emerson Street and El Camino Real.  He recommended the project 
be split into a smaller project and built back into the plan. 
Mr. Kamhi noted the FY 2023 Proposed Budget was a starting point for 
funding.  Funding from the City could be leveraged for additional funding 
sources. 
Mayor Burt asked if the grant funds were pursued even if the project was 
not listed on the CIP.  
Mr. Kamhi answered yes. 
Mayor Burt articulated there was a significant CIP shortfall and asked how 
Staff worked into planning anticipated grant funding.  Absent the grant 
funds, there appeared to be a gap that could never be filled. 
Mr. Shikada explained transportation CIPs often pursued grant funding while 
other projects typically received funding from earmark opportunities. 
Mayor Burt wanted to explore a path to integrate grant funds into the 
planning while still following correct accounting practices.  
Mr. Shikada noted the City recently engage with a contractor to help with 
grants and grant administration. 
Council Member Stone appreciated the cautiously optimistic viewpoint 
reflected in the FY 2023 Proposed Budget.  He expressed confusion and 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
11 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
frustration that funding for the Youth Connectiveness Initiative was not in 
the Budget.  There were alarming trends in youth mental health and the 
initiative fostered stronger youth and adult relationships.  He recommended 
Finance 
Committee 
restore 
the 
$50,000 
funding 
for 
the 
Youth 
Connectiveness Initiative.  He asked if adding one FTE Code Enforcement 
Officer was an additional position added along with the mid-year Council 
direction. 
Ms. Nose confirmed it was Council’s direction made at mid-year. 
Council Member Stone understood the historic number of positions in Code 
Enforcement was three. 
Ms. Nose answered yes. 
Council Member Stone asked if there was a discussion of bringing the Code 
Enforcement office back to full capacity.  
Ms. Nose noted the FY 2023 Proposed Budget recommended a part-time 
position as well for Code Enforcement. 
Planning and Transportation Director Jon Lait explained there was a retired 
employee who expressed interest in continuing to work but with limited 
hours.  
Council Member Stone appreciated the approach. 
Vice Mayor Kou echoed Council Member Stone’s comments regarding the 
Youth Connectiveness Initiative.  She asked what was needed to make the 
funding available annually. 
Ms. Nose explained the Council could allocate $50,000 as an ongoing 
expenditure or for the 3-year term to align with the current contract. 
Vice Mayor Kou recommended Finance Committee discuss restoring funding 
for the Youth Connectiveness Initiative. 
Council Member Cormack appreciated Staff’s work and complimented them 
on their outline of where the money comes from and where it goes.  She 
recommended Finance Committee discuss inflation and how to accelerate 
funding for the Cubberley Community Center. She supported Staff’s 
recommendation regarding the 2-year service reinvestments, the two uses 
proposed for the surplus and she supported a check-in.   
Council Member DuBois appreciated the trade-offs and Staff’s approach to 
managing the transition.  He believed the Council should have another mid-
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
12 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
year review because the schedule was too tight to have a check-in.  He 
requested Finance Committee explore reinstating funding for the National 
Citizen Survey and explore hiring Staff to work on the Downtown Plan.  He 
wanted to understand the reason why the FY 2023 Proposed Budget did not 
include funding for the Youth Connectiveness initiative.  
Ms. Nose explained when the program was reinstated in the year 2022, it 
was a one-time reinstatement.  
Mr. Shikada recommended the Finance Committee discuss it in more detail. 
Council Member DuBois restated he wanted to understand if there was 
another reason why the program was not included.  
Council Member Tanaka supported Finance Committee discussing the Youth 
Connectiveness initiative.  He recommended the Finance Committee also 
discuss the Mid-Town Shuttle.  He inquired if funding was needed for net 
promoter scores. 
Ms. Shikada commented the ticket tracking system was not included in the 
FY 2023 Proposed Budget 
Ms. Nose answered Council Member Tanaka’s previous question with the 
average salary and benefits year over year was 2.8 percent per employee. 
Mayor Burt wanted to understand the reality of the City’s ability to hire 
employees and what portion of the proposed positions would realistically be 
filled over the year.  He questioned whether it was a wise budgeting policy 
to fund positions without ongoing funding identified.  He believed the 
Documentary Transfer Tax, Property Tax, and Sales Tax revenues were well 
underestimated.  The prospect of a recession continued to grow and the FY 
2023 Proposed Budget should be cautious of that.  He recommended the 
Finance Committee consider whether to adopt the proposed Staff positions. 
Council Member Cormack asked if a stair-step strategy could be used for 
proposed Staff positions.  
Ms. Nose explained the positions could be included in the FY 2023 Proposed 
Budget but not receive  funding until a later date. 
Council Member Cormack did not object to having Finance Committee 
consider it but believed delaying hiring of Staff was not in the best interest 
of the City.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
13 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed some of the items should be funded but also 
agreed the FY 2023 Proposed Budget should be conservative.  He supported 
having the Finance Committee discuss how to balance out the risks. 
Council Member Filseth stated the City had a constrained problem.  The 
headcount in both police and fire had declined gradually but steadily.  Not 
only did the City need to restore services lost during the pandemic but also 
to address structural concerns that pre-dated the pandemic.   He supported 
Staff’s recommendation for the 2-year transition.  
Council Member Stone appreciated Mayor Burt’s concern about the proposed 
Staffing positions.  He was concerned about the economy as well as the 
polling data showing no evidence of a clear win with the ballot measures.  
He supported having the Finance Committee explore it further and noted the 
positions were critical to the community.  He had no strong opinion on 
whether to have check-in after the Finance Committee’s deliberations.  
Mayor Burt announced there was no strong interest from Council in having a 
check-in after Finance Committee’s deliberations.  
NO ACTION TAKEN 
[The Council took a break and returned at 10:05 PM] 
AGENDA CHANGES, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS  
 
The Council deferred Item 15 to a future date.  
Mayor Burt mentioned the City Manager suggested a Council Ad Hoc 
Committee be formed to resolve the open issues with the Junior Museum 
and Zoo. 
City Attorney Molly Stump confirmed the Mayor had the authority to appoint 
an Ad Hoc Committee. 
PUBLIC COMMENT:  
Aram James stated the City must have honest police officers in the criminal 
justice system.  He stated he wanted to know the hiring process for the next 
Chief of Police.  He noted the department head of Human Relations wrote 
him a letter and made false accusations.  The letter was an attempt to chill 
his First Amendment advocacy.   
Rebecca Eisenberg agreed with Mr. James’s comments about the frustration 
in the community.  She expressed frustration that the City could not fund 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
14 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
the Youth Connectiveness Initiative but could provide $10 million in 
subsidies to the Palo Alto History Museum. 
CONSENT CALENDAR  
PUBLIC COMMENT: 
Aram James stated the concept of making stand-alone hate speech a 
misdemeanor ordinance was against the Constitution. 
Rebecca Eisenberg remarked either the Agendas were intentionally made 
unclear or the Staff person could use lessons in writing.  She strongly 
opposed the adoption of Item 8. 
Mayor Burt inquired if Item 6 did not pass, would that delayed the approval 
of the balance of the recommendations.  
City Attorney Stump answered yes, but the Council could pull the item and 
divide it into parts. 
Council Member Tanaka Registered a no vote on item 9.  
 
Mayor Burt requested to pull Item 6.  
 
MOTION: Council Member Cormack motioned, seconded by Mayor Burt to 
approve Consent Agenda Items 5-11.   
5. 
Approve Minutes from the April 11, 2022 City Council Meeting 
6. 
Policy and Services Committee recommends that the City Council 
accept the recommendations from the September 14, 2021 and 
February 8, 2022 committee meetings regarding race and equity, 
with the following change: schedule a City Council Action Item (May 
9, 2022) on whether to pursue a misdemeanor ordinance and other 
methods to deter hateful speech while complying with the 
constitution 
7. 
Parks 
and 
Recreation 
Commission 
Recommend 
Adopting 
an 
Ordinance to Amend the Foothills Nature Preserve Attendance Range 
to 400-600 Guests 
8. 
PUBLIC HEARING: Adoption of an Ordinance Amending Palo Alto 
Municipal 
Code 
(PAMC) 
Title 
18 
(Zoning), 
Chapters 
18.04 
(Definitions), 
18.16 
(Neighborhood, 
Community, 
and 
Service 
Commercial 
(CN, 
CC 
and 
CS) 
Districts), 
18.18 (Downtown 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
15 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
Commercial (CD) Districts) and 18.30 (A) and (C) the Retail and 
Ground Floor Combining Districts. Environmental Review: Exempt 
Under California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines 
Section 15061(b)(3) until December 16, 2022. 
9. 
Approval of Contract No. C22183462 with Macias Gini & O'Connell 
LLP (MGO) for External Financial Audit Services in an Amount Not to 
Exceed $599,319 (Including a 10 Percent Contingency Additional 
Services Amount of $54,934) Through March 31, 2025. 
10. 
Policy and Services Committee Recommends the City Council Accept 
the City Auditor’s Quarterly Status Report (Q2 of Fiscal Year 2021) 
11. 
SECOND READING: Adoption of Ordinance 5547 Amending Existing 
Palo Alto Municipal Code Chapter 5.30, Disposable Foodware Items 
and Other Disposable Products, to Comply with California Assembly 
Bill 
1276 
(Single-Use 
Foodware 
Accessories 
and 
Standard 
Condiments) Requiring Additional Restrictions on the Use of 
Disposable Foodware and Condiments (FIRST READING: April 18, 
2022: PASSED 7-0) 
 
MOTION SPLIT FOR THE PURPOSE OF VOTING  
MOTION PASSED Items 5, 7-11: 7-0 
MOTION PASSED Item 6: 6-1 - Tanaka no 
Council Member Tanaka could not support Item 9 and encouraged the City 
to be cautious given the uncertain Budget situation.  
CITY MANAGER COMMENTS  
City Manager Ed Shikada noted the City had been tracking an increase in 
COVID-19 cases as well as the approval of the vaccinations for children 6-
years old and under.  The Palo Alto Library hours of operation were 
expanded for all five library branches.  Assembly Bill 481 went into effect on 
January 1, 2022 which allowed police agencies to use military equipment.  
The Palo Alto Police Department’s proposed policy was posted online for 
public input.  The Council would consider the policy no later than November 
1, 2022.  A waterproofing project was underway for the Civic Center Plaza.  
The public should expect loud noises during construction hours.  On May 4, 
2022, a Mitchell Park dog park community meeting was to be held virtually, 
on May 7, 2022 was the May Fete Parade and on May 14, 2022 was the 
grand opening of the Junior Museum and Zoo and Rinconada Park.  
Upcoming items for City Council on May 9, 2022 included the parklet 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
16 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
program, a report on Palo Alto’s response to hate crimes and hate incidents 
and potential public/private partnership with First Tee Silicon Valley. 
ACTION ITEMS 
12. 
Adoption of Resolution 10032 Authorizing the Issuance and Sale of 
One or More Series of General Obligation Refunding (Refinancing) 
Bonds (Election of 2008) in an Aggregate Principal Amount Not to 
Exceed $58 million, and Execution of a Paying Agency Agreement, and 
Certain Other Related Documents and Authorizing Official Actions 
Related Thereto  
Administrative Services Director Kiley Nose specified Staff was seeking 
authorization for the refunding of the library General Obligation (GO) 
Bond.  The bonds were approved in 2008 by the voters for a maximum 
amount of $76 million.  The City would refund the Series 2020 A for tax-
exempt in order to have a lower annual debt payment.  The Series 2013 A 
could only be refunded at a taxable rate and the City would only pursue 
that if it would facilitate a savings.  The proposed action would result in a 
13.3 percent savings and property owners would see a reduction on their 
property taxes. 
PUBLIC COMMENTS: None 
Council Member Cormack asked if the rate per $100,000 that an individual 
property owner paid decreased when the total assessed value increased. 
Ms. Nose answered yes. 
Council Member Cormack understood the Certificate of Participation (COP) 
was not included in the bonding capacity.  
Manager of Treasury, Debt & Investments Tarun Narayan explained the 
COP were included but the GO bonds were not. 
Council Member Cormack mentioned the San Francisquito Creek Joint 
Powers Authority was not included in the preliminary official statement. 
MOTION: Council Member Cormack motioned, seconded by Mayor Burt to 
approve Resolution 10032 to:  
  
1. Authorize the refinancing of the outstanding Series 2010A and 
Series 2013A General Obligation (Library) Bonds through the 
issuance of tax-exempt and federally taxable General Obligation 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
17 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
Bonds (Bonds) in the not to exceed amount of $58,000,000; and 
 
2. Approve the Paying Agency Agreement, Official Notice of Sale, 
Preliminary Official Statement, Irrevocable Refunding Instructions 
related to the Series 2010A Bonds, Escrow Deposit and Trust 
Agreement related to the Series 2013A Bonds Between City of Palo 
Alto and U.S. Bank Trust Company National Association; and 
authorize related documents and actions.  
Council Member Cormack was grateful Staff brought the item to Council 
without being directed to. 
Council Member Tanaka supported the proposal.  He remarked interest rates 
were increasing and he asked how the City was able to refinance at a lower 
rate. 
Mr. Narayan explained the current rate was set in the years 2010 and 2013.  
Rates were higher back then than in current times. 
Council Member Tanaka wanted to understand why the City did not refinance 
when rates were lower. 
Ms. Nose expressed it had to do with workload capacity and other priorities.  
Bonds must be in place for a specific length of time before they could be 
refinanced.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
13. 
Policy and Services Committee Recommends that the City Council 
Direct Staff to Reduce the Length of the Community Survey and 
Work with the Chair of the Policy & Services Committee as an Ad 
Hoc  
Deputy City Manager Cotton Gaines disclosed at the April 12, 2022 Policy 
and Services Committee (P&S) meeting, the Committee discussed the 
survey and passed a motion with a 2-1 vote.  Staff was seeking direction 
on if the Council was interested in shortening the survey or keeping the 
length as is.  In the year 2020, P&S revised the survey questions.  
Council Member Stone summarized that P&S voted 2-1 in support of the 
motion.  Council Member Tanaka was interested in discontinuing the 
community survey and using another form to poll residents.  Council 
Members Cormack and Stone believed there was still value in the survey 
but agreed that the survey was too long. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
18 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
Council Member Tanaka supported making the survey shorter and wanted 
to see more rapid feedback at the time of service.  The survey was held 
annually, it took too long to receive the feedback and folks experienced 
survey fatigue. 
Council Member DuBois stated administrating a good survey was an art 
and science.  He believed the survey could not be shortened anymore and 
the length was the same as the standard survey.  It was important to keep 
in alignment with other jurisdictions to do benchmarking.  He found the 
data gathered in the survey extremely useful and it was the only 
statistically representative data available.  He supported having the survey 
sent out annually and was hesitant to make changes to it. 
Council Member Cormack added Staff used the information to formulate 
Key Performance Indicators (KPI) in the budget.  Some of the questions 
were too long and she supported having the Chair of P&S review it further.  
She disclosed the Council had not used the data in the 4-years she had 
been on Council and did not support having it sent out annually. 
Council Member Filseth aligned his comments with Council Member DuBois 
and supported having the survey be conducted annually. 
Vice Mayor Kou echoed Council Member Filseth and Council Member 
DuBois’s comment.  It was valuable information and helped remind the 
City what areas needed improvement. 
Mayor Burt explained in the past several years the Council did not have an 
updated survey going into the priority setting meeting.  He agreed the 
survey was a valuable tool and supported the proposal with the caveat 
that any changes be done in consultation with POLCO. 
PUBLIC COMMENT: None 
MOTION: Mayor Burt motioned, seconded by Council Member DuBois to 
authorize the Chair of Policy & Services Committee to work with staff and 
POLCO to assure compatibility related to benchmarking of any revisions to 
the survey. 
Council Member DuBois believed the motion was more about evaluation and 
not a reduction in length. 
Council Member Stone commented that P&S’s motion was meant to be more 
of an evaluation rather than a hard directive.  
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
19 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
14. 
Clarification 
of 
In-Person 
Attendance 
Protocols 
for 
Council 
Committees and Boards and Commissions (Continued from April 4, 
2022 Meeting) 
City Manager Ed Shikada noted the item was differed from a previous 
Agenda.  The topic was a question of setting expectations for Council as it 
related to in-person attendance and whether Council should continue to 
make the findings authorized under Assembly Bill (AB) 361.  
PUBLIC COMMENTS:  
Rebecca Eisenberg stated if the City were to mandate attendance of 
volunteers then childcare should be provided. 
Council Member Cormack asked if the City allowed remote participation in 
Committee meetings before the pandemic. 
City Attorney Molly Stump remarked there were no standing rules that 
addressed it and recalled there was never any remote attendance in prior 
years. 
Council Member Cormack understood the AB 361 findings were relying on 
the social distancing requirements encouraged by the County Health Officer. 
Ms. Stump confirmed that is correct. 
Council Member Cormack inquired about Council Member Liaisons. 
Ms. Stump answered the Council never made those types of rules for its 
Boards, Commissions or Council Liaisons.  
Council Member Cormack was open to having a limited number of remote 
attendance for Committee meetings but did not want it to become a 
standard practice.  With respect to AB 361, she was becoming increasingly 
less inclined to be able to make the findings.   With respect to Boards and 
Commissions, the rule should be consistent and they should not be able to 
decide independently. 
Council Member Stone wanted to be consistent on how the City policies were 
applied.  He found it odd to have climate change as a Council priority but 
then create a policy that constrained remote attendance.  He supported 
remote attendance for Council Members on Ad Hoc Committees and Council 
Liaisons to Boards and Commissions.  He wanted to continue the current 
practice of capping it at five remote attendances annually for full Council 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
20 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
meetings.  With respect to Boards and Commissions, he did not support 
Council micromanaging their rules. 
Council Member DuBois wanted to understand the process if the Council did 
not make the findings for AB 361 but wanted to continue hybrid meetings. 
Ms. Stump explained the public could attend in-person or remotely.  Council 
Members, Board and Commission Members would have to follow past 
practices of disclosing on the agenda the address of the remote participant.   
Remote participation had to be in a space that allowed for members of the 
public to observe the meeting. 
Council Member DuBois inquired if there was a discussion about making 
changes to the prior rule. 
Mayor Burt shared there was State legislation and the City Association had 
reviewed it. 
Council Member DuBois recommended not making the findings for AB 361 
and continue hybrid meetings.  Allowing the public and consultants to 
participate virtually made a lot of sense.  The value of being in person was 
very important and the tone of public comment may be different if they were 
in person.  There needed to be consistency among the Boards and 
Commission and a cap on remote participation should apply to everyone. 
Council Member Filseth agreed with Council Member Stone.  The technology 
advancements supported virtual participation. 
Vice Mayor Kou inquired if the City could accommodate hybrid in-person 
meetings for all Boards, Commissions, Committees and Council. 
City Clerk Lesley Milton answered yes. 
Mayor Burt acknowledged the barrier of noticing when Council Members 
participated virtually.  The hybrid model allowed the public to attend the 
meetings virtually and eliminated the need to do remote noticing.  He 
recommended three remote participations per Committee.  With respect to 
Boards and Commissions, the City should continue with AB 361 in practice 
until legislation was adopted and then decide how to move forward. 
Council Member Tanaka agreed with Council Member Stone.  Virtual 
participation was more effective and more transparent.  He fully supported 
remote meetings for Commissions, Boards and Committees.  He agreed 
having to post the location of the remote participant was archaic. 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
21 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
MOTION: Council Member Tanaka motioned, seconded by Mayor Burt to 
direct staff to continue to present the findings for AB 361 for the Council, 
Commissions and Boards.   
Ms. Stump explained Council was providing direction on whether to 
continue to include the findings for AB 361 on the Agenda. 
Council Member Cormack asked what the duration was for the motion. 
Ms. Stump explained if a Council Member could no longer make the 
findings for AB 361.  The Council Member should vote no, then request the 
item be pulled from the Consent Calendar and discuss it. 
Council Member Cormack understood the Commissions and Boards could 
take individualized approaches to AB 361. 
Ms. Stump commented City Council does not make the findings for the 
whole City. 
Council Member Cormack remarked that made her uncomfortable.  
Ms. Stump specified if any Board or Commission Member could not make 
the findings.  They should vote no on the motion for Ab 361. 
Council Member Cormack asked if Staff would return to Council for further 
direction once AB 361 expired or new legislation was passed. 
Ms. Stump answered AB 361 did not expire until the year 2024 and Staff 
will advise the Council if there is a change in the law. 
PROPOSED AMENDMENT: Council Member DuBois proposed: 
a) Council Members can participate remotely in Council Committee 
meetings up to 3 times per year;  
MOTION PASSED:6-1 Stone no 
b) Board Members and Commissioners can participate remotely but 
are encouraged to meet in person and the Boards and 
Commissions should establish a remote attendance policy 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
Council Member Tanaka could not support the amendment.  Boards and 
Commissions should be allowed to make their own decisions. 
Vice Mayor Kou acknowledged that some Board and Commission Members 
were from other cities.  One of her concerns was that those members did 
not know Palo Alto if they were not required to come to in person 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
22 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
meetings.  She supported encouraging Boards and Commission to attend 
in person.  
Council Member Stone supported Item B of the amendment but not Item 
A. 
Council Member Tanaka understood Item A would be a restriction from 
current practices.  
Ms. Stump claimed the current practice was Council Members must attend 
Committee meetings in person.  If they could not then they were counted 
as absent. 
AMENDMENT TO THE MOTION: Council Member Tanaka motioned, 
seconded by Council member Filesth to allow Council members to 
participate remotely in Committee meetings on an unlimited basis. 
Mayor Burt explained if passed, the amendment would supersede Item A 
of the motion. 
Council Member Cormack did not support the motion. 
Council Member DuBois inquired if the motion only applied when AB 361 
was in effect. 
Council Member Tanaka clarified it would go on indefinitely.  
MOTION FAILED: 4-3, Cormack, Burt, Kou, DuBois 
FINAL MOTION: Council Member Tanaka motioned, seconded by Mayor 
Burt to direct staff to continue to present the findings for AB 361 for the 
Council, Commissions and Boards and  
a) Council Members can participate remotely in Council Committee 
meetings up to 3 times per year;  
b) Board Members and Commissioners can participate remotely but 
are encouraged to meet in person and the Boards and 
Commissions should establish a remote attendance policy 
Council Member Cormack inquired if Item A and Item B should be 
modified. 
Ms. Stump articulated Item A was a direction to put the change in the 
Council’s Procedures and Protocols.  Item B would result in a modification 
to the Board and Commission Handbook.  
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
23 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
MOTION PASSED: 7-0 
COUNCIL MEMBER QUESTIONS, COMMENTS, ANNOUNCEMENTS 
Council Member DuBois shared his experiences from visiting Oaxaca.  The 
City of Palo Alto funded an observatory and telescope to Oaxaca, provided 
funding for a school for abused and/or abandoned children, funded an 
orphanage, computers and digital learning, supplied fire trucks and provided 
rainwater capture systems.  Oaxaca passed a resolution honoring Palo Alto 
as well as Mayor Burt.  They discussed expanding the carbon offset program, 
expanding the rain capture program to schools, and participating in a 
sustainable greenbelt.  There was a trip planned for Mayor Burt to visit 
several European sister cities and in the works was a trip to Palo Philippines 
in October of 2022.  He concluded the trip was personally funded and highly 
recommended Council Members to attend upcoming trips. 
Vice Mayor Kou remarked during the prior tax measure discussion she made 
comments and wanted to correct them.  The Palo Alto Daily Post wrote a 
column, not an editorial, and the column gave constructive criticism about 
the tax.  The column did not state whether the author was for or against the 
tax. 
Council Member Cormack thanked Staff for the informational report, Item 
16, on waste diversion and pilot project. 
Mayor Burt attended the meeting regarding Stanford’s Municipal Services 
Study and announced they will be holding a series of public meetings.  A key 
component of the presentation was the obligation to provide municipal 
services by Stanford University for all of its residents and workers.  Santa 
Clara County enforced the Tri-Party Agreement but Palo Alto was a full 
partner in the agreement.  He encouraged the City to have stronger 
engagement in the matter.  The study concluded that while Stanford 
University had strong municipal services, it did not provide transparency or 
accountability to its residents like a government agency did.  The League of 
Cities was holding their Sacramento Conference in the coming week.  
CLOSED SESSION  
15. 
CONFERENCE WITH REAL PROPERTY NEGOTIATORS Authority: 
Government Code Section 54956.8  Property: 300 Homer Avenue, 
Assessors Parcel Number 120-17-093 Negotiating Party: Palo Alto 
Museum City Negotiators: Ed Shikada, Kiley Nose Subject of 
Potential Negotiations: lease Price and Terms of Payment 
 
ITEM CONTINUED TO A FUTURE MEETING 
SUMMARY MINUTES 
 
 
24 
Special Meeting May 2, 2022 
Materials related to an item on this agenda submitted to the Board after distribution of the agenda packet are available for 
public inspection at www.CityofPaloAlto.org. 
 
ADJOURNMENT Meeting was adjourned at 11:50 PM.  
 
